{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-ItalicMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cspthree\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs51\fsmilli25995 \cf2 1 | Introduction to Medicine and\
Healthcare
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students are introduced to the field of medicine and healthcare. We explain what\
healthcare professionals (doctors, nurses, and other specialists) do, and how hospitals and\
clinics help people stay healthy. For example, we might describe how a pediatrician cares for\
children or how surgeons and nurses work together during an operation. The lesson shows that\
medicine combines science and compassion, and that many different people (doctors, nurses,\
pharmacists, technicians) work together on a medical team.\
After this lesson, students will understand the role of healthcare workers and the basics of a\
hospital or clinic. They will know why doctors study science and how medical teams use\
knowledge of the body to treat and prevent illness.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 1 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What does a doctor do to help sick people?\
Who are some people you might meet in a hospital (e.g. nurse, pharmacist)?\
Why might a hospital have many different types of doctors and specialists?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Doctors and Nurses: 
\f0\b0 Doctors diagnose illnesses and may give medicine or perform\
surgery; nurses care for patients and help doctors. Together they help sick and injured\
people get better.\

\f1\b Medical Team: 
\f0\b0 A hospital or clinic has many roles (doctors, nurses, lab technicians,\
pharmacists). Everyone works together to keep patients healthy.\

\f1\b Medical Science: 
\f0\b0 Medicine uses biology and chemistry to understand the body. Doctors\
learn about body systems, diseases, and treatments to help patients.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
If someone breaks their arm, who should they see and why?\
Name one healthcare professional (other than a doctor) and what they do.\
Why is it important for a doctor to know about the human body\'92s systems?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Hospitals have special rooms and machines: for example, operating rooms for surgery\
and MRI machines to image the body.\
Emergency services (paramedics, ambulances) bring sick or injured people to hospital\
quickly.\
Many children\'92s hospitals have play areas and child specialists to make kids comfortable\
during visits.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Skill Check:
\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
In your own words, explain why medicine is a team effort (with doctors, nurses, and\
others working together).\
Give an example of how science and technology help doctors (e.g. MRI scans, blood\
tests).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 2 | Cells, DNA, and Heredity
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about cells and the genetic material inside them. We explain that\
every living thing is made of cells, and that each cell contains DNA; the instructions for how the\
body works. We describe how DNA is organized into genes and chromosomes, which determine\
traits (like eye color or blood type) inherited from parents. For example, if one parent has brown\
eyes and the other blue, children may inherit one of those genes. We also introduce the idea\
that changes (mutations) in DNA can cause genetic diseases (like sickle cell anemia or cystic\
fibrosis).\
After this lesson, students will know that DNA is a blueprint inside cells and that genes are\
inherited from parents. They will understand that our cells follow genetic instructions to grow\
and function, and that some diseases happen when genes don\'92t work correctly.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 2 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you inherit from your parents (e.g. eye color, hair type)?\
What do you think DNA is and where is it found in the body?\
Can you think of a trait (like freckles) that runs in some families?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Cells Have DNA: 
\f0\b0 Each cell in the body contains DNA, the molecule that stores genetic\
information. DNA looks like a twisted ladder (double helix) and is found in the cell\'92s\
nucleus.\

\f1\b Genes and Chromosomes: 
\f0\b0 DNA is organized into genes (units of heredity). Humans\
have 23 pairs of chromosomes carrying thousands of genes. We get one set of\
chromosomes from our mother and one from our father.\

\f1\b Inheritance: 
\f0\b0 Genes carry traits. For example, if the\
\'93brown eye\'94 gene is dominant, a\
child will have brown eyes if they inherit it from either parent. Some traits (like blood\
type) are controlled by combinations of genes from both parents.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why might siblings look different even though they have the same parents?\
What could happen if there is a mistake (mutation) in a gene for an important protein?\
How does DNA information get passed down from parents to children?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Some diseases are genetic. For example, people with cystic fibrosis have a gene that\
causes sticky mucus. Hemophilia is another example (blood that doesn\'92t clot).\
Genetic testing can sometimes predict diseases by looking at a person\'92s DNA in a lab.\
Scientists study DNA to trace ancestry and understand how life evolved.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Skill Check:
\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Explain in simple terms what a gene is and why children share traits with their parents.\
Give an example of a genetic trait and explain how it is inherited (dominant vs.\
recessive).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 3 | Blood and Immunity
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore the composition of blood and the basics of the immune system.\
We explain that blood is a liquid tissue containing red blood cells (which carry oxygen), white\
blood cells (which fight infections), platelets (which help blood clot), and plasma (the liquid). For\
example, red blood cells pick up oxygen from the lungs and deliver it to cells, while white blood\
cells act like guards that attack germs. We also introduce the immune system: the body\'92s\
defense against invaders. This includes antibodies and special white blood cells that recognize\
and remember germs. We mention how vaccines train the immune system to recognize specific\
viruses or bacteria.\
After this lesson, students will know the main parts of blood and their roles. They will understand\
that red cells carry oxygen, white cells fight infections, and platelets stop bleeding by clotting.\
They will also understand that the immune system protects us from disease.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 3 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What does your blood look like when you get a small cut (think about clots)?\
Why do you think doctors sometimes take a small sample of your blood?\
What do you do when you have a fever (hint: white blood cells)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Blood Components: 
\f0\b0 Blood is about 55% plasma (liquid) and 45% cells. Red blood cells\
contain hemoglobin to carry oxygen. White blood cells include many types (like\
lymphocytes and neutrophils) that identify and destroy germs. Platelets are tiny\
fragments that gather at wounds to form clots and stop bleeding.\

\f1\b Oxygen Transport: 
\f0\b0 Red cells pick up oxygen in the lungs and deliver it to every cell.\
They also carry carbon dioxide (a waste gas) back to the lungs to be exhaled.\

\f1\b Immune Defense: 
\f0\b0 White blood cells protect the body from infection. When germs enter,\
the immune system responds with inflammation (fever, swelling) to fight them. Vaccines\
introduce a safe piece of a germ so the immune system can prepare defenses\
(antibodies) without getting sick.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What might happen if you lose a lot of blood (why is it dangerous)?\
Why shouldn\'92t we use antibiotics for a common cold (hint: cold is usually a virus)?\
How does your body heal a cut (which blood parts help)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Blood Types: 
\f0\b0 Blood is typed (A, B, AB, O) based on special proteins. For example, a\
person with type O can donate blood to anyone.\

\f1\b Blood Donation: 
\f0\b0 People can give blood (usually A or B types) to help others. The\
donated blood is checked for infections and matched carefully.\

\f1\b Fever: 
\f0\b0 When you have a fever, it\'92s because white blood cells are fighting an infection.\
Heat helps the body slow down bacteria.
\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Describe the roles of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in simple terms.\
Explain why handwashing can help your immune system (hint: removes germs before\
they enter the body).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 4 | The Heart and Circulatory Health
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students study the heart in detail and learn how it works as a pump. We describe\
that the heart has four chambers (two atria and two ventricles) and valves that control blood\
flow. We explain how blood enters the heart from the body (right side), goes to the lungs for\
oxygen, then returns to the heart (left side) and is pumped to the rest of the body. We also\
introduce blood pressure (the force of blood on vessel walls) and why too high pressure can\
damage vessels. We mention how a clogged artery can lead to a heart attack.\
After this lesson, students will understand that the heart is a muscular pump with valves that\
keep blood moving one way. They will know that blood goes through a loop: body \uc0\u8594  heart \u8594 \
lungs \uc0\u8594  heart \u8594  body. They will also learn that high blood pressure and unhealthy habits can\
strain the heart.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 4 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How many chambers do you think are in the human heart?\
Where does blood go right after it leaves the heart (hint: lungs or body)?\
Why is it important that the heart valves only let blood go one way?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Heart Structure: 
\f0\b0 The heart has four chambers: two atria on top and two ventricles on\
bottom. Valves between them open and close with each heartbeat to prevent backflow.\

\f1\b Blood Flow: 
\f0\b0 Blood with low oxygen enters the right side of the heart and is pumped to\
the lungs to pick up oxygen. Oxygen-rich blood returns to the left side, then is pumped\
out to all body tissues.\

\f1\b Blood Pressure: 
\f0\b0 Blood pressure is the push of blood on artery walls. It has two\
numbers (systolic/diastolic). High blood pressure (\'93hypertension\'94) can strain the heart\
and harm vessels, increasing risk of heart attack or stroke.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
If a blood vessel to the heart is blocked, what might happen (use what you know about\
pumps and pipes)?\
Name one activity or habit that keeps blood pressure low.\
What does the heart send through arteries: oxygen-rich blood or oxygen-poor blood?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Heartbeat Sounds: 
\f0\b0 Each \'93lub-dub\'94 you hear through a stethoscope is a valve closing.\
The heart\'92s pacemaker (natural, in the right atrium) sets the rhythm.\

\f1\b Heart Disease: 
\f0\b0 A common problem is atherosclerosis, where fatty deposits build up in\
arteries. Eating healthy fats and exercising can slow this.\

\f1\b Emergency Response: 
\f0\b0 In a heart attack (blocked artery), immediate medical help is\
needed (CPR can keep blood moving until doctors arrive).
\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
Trace one drop of blood: List the sequence from body tissues to heart to lungs and back.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do doctors check cholesterol and blood pressure? How do these relate to heart\
health?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 5 | Nutrition and Metabolism
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn how the body uses food to get energy and build new materials. We\
explain that food contains nutrients (carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals) which\
the digestive system breaks down into usable parts. For example, carbohydrates are turned into\
glucose (blood sugar) for energy, proteins into amino acids for muscle and cell repair, and fats\
into fatty acids for long-term energy and cell membranes. We introduce metabolism as all the\
chemical reactions in the body that transform nutrients into energy and building blocks. We also\
mention that vitamins and minerals (like iron, calcium, and vitamins C and D) help cells work\
properly.\
After this lesson, students will understand that eating balanced meals gives the body fuel\
(energy) and materials to grow. They will know the main roles of carbohydrates (energy),\
proteins (growth/repair), and fats (energy storage and insulation). They will also learn that\
excessive sugar or fat can cause health issues, while vitamins and minerals are important in\
small amounts.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 5 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do we need to eat fruits and vegetables every day?\
What do you think happens to a piece of bread after you swallow it?\
How does food give you the energy to play or study?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Macronutrients: 
\f0\b0 Carbohydrates (sugars and starches) are the body\'92s quick energy\
source; proteins are used to build muscles, enzymes, and repair tissues; fats provide\
long-term energy and help absorb certain vitamins. Each gram of carbohydrate or\
protein provides 4 calories, fat provides 9 calories.\

\f1\b Vitamins and Minerals: 
\f0\b0 Vitamins (like C, D) and minerals (like calcium, iron) do not give\
energy but are essential for health. For example, vitamin C helps heal wounds, calcium\
builds strong bones, and iron helps red blood cells carry oxygen.\

\f1\b Balanced Diet: 
\f0\b0 A healthy diet has all nutrients: grains (carbs), proteins (meat, beans),\
fats (oils, nuts in moderation), and plenty of fruits and vegetables. Too much junk food\
(sugar/fat) can lead to obesity and other issues (like diabetes or high cholesterol).\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What nutrients would you eat to help build strong bones and muscles?\
Why is it important to drink water every day (even though it has no calories)?\
How does fiber in fruits and vegetables help the digestive system?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Healthy Eating Plate: 
\f0\b0 Foods are often grouped: eat colorful veggies and fruits, whole\
grains (brown rice, whole-wheat bread), lean proteins (chicken, beans), and dairy or\
substitutes.\

\f1\b Energy Needs: 
\f0\b0 When you run or exercise, your muscles use more oxygen and fuel, so\
you burn calories faster. This is why athletes need more calories.\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Metabolism: 
\f0\b0 The rate of metabolism varies by age, activity, and genetics. Eating\
breakfast can \'93kick-start\'94 metabolism for the day.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Identify one high-protein and one high-carbohydrate food from your meals.\
Explain why skipping meals might make it harder to concentrate in school.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 6 | Kidneys and Body Balance
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students study the kidneys and the urinary system. We explain that the kidneys\
act like filters for the blood: they remove waste and extra water to form urine (pee). Each\
minute, the kidneys filter about half a cup of blood. We describe how urine (containing water,\
salt, and waste chemicals) leaves the kidneys, goes down ureters to the bladder (where it is\
stored), and then is released through the urethra when you urinate. For example, if you drink a\
lot of water, your kidneys remove the excess by making more urine. We also explain that\
kidneys help balance the body\'92s salt, water, and pH levels so cells work properly.\
After this lesson, students will know that kidneys are vital for cleansing the blood and\
maintaining a stable internal environment. They will understand that urine contains body wastes\
and that staying hydrated helps the kidneys remove toxins. They will also learn why it is\
dangerous if kidneys fail (toxic buildup) and why drinking enough water helps kidney function.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 6 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you feel thirsty, and what happens to the water you drink?\
What do you think urine is made of (what does it contain)?\
Why do you think it\'92s important to drink clean water instead of dirty water?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Kidney Function: 
\f0\b0 Each kidney has many tiny filters (nephrons) that clean the blood.\
They remove waste products (like urea and extra salts) and excess water, producing\
urine.\

\f1\b Homeostasis: 
\f0\b0 Kidneys keep the body\'92s balance of fluids, salts (sodium, potassium), and\
acids. For example, if you eat salty food, kidneys will excrete extra salt in urine to keep\
blood salt levels normal.\

\f1\b Urine Formation: 
\f0\b0 After filtering, the urine flows to the bladder for storage. A healthy\
bladder can hold about 1\'962 cups of urine before you feel the urge to go.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What happens to extra salt and waste in your body if your kidneys didn\'92t work?\
Why is it important to drink enough water every day (consider waste removal)?\
How might a doctor test kidney function (hint: blood or urine test shows wastes)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Dialysis: 
\f0\b0 If kidneys fail, machines can do the job temporarily. Dialysis filters a patient\'92s\
blood like kidneys do.\

\f1\b Kidney Stones: 
\f0\b0 Sometimes minerals crystallize and form stones in the kidney. They can\
be painful and may require treatment (like extra water or shock waves to break them).\

\f1\b Bladder Control: 
\f0\b0 Nerves from the spinal cord tell you when your bladder is full. This is\
why babies need diapers and older children learn bladder control.\

\f1\b Skill Check:
\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Describe one way the kidneys help keep your body healthy (e.g., removing wastes,\
balancing salt).\
Explain why someone with kidney failure might need a transplant or dialysis.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 7 | Brain, Nerves, and the Senses
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore the nervous system, especially the brain and senses. We\
explain that the brain is the control center of the body: it receives information from sensory\
organs and sends instructions to muscles and glands. We introduce neurons (nerve cells) that\
carry electrical signals through nerves. For example, when you touch a hot surface, sensory\
nerves send a quick message to the spinal cord and brain, which then tell your hand to pull back\
(a reflex). We also cover the five senses: eyes (vision), ears (hearing), nose (smell), tongue\
(taste), and skin (touch/pain). Each sense organ detects specific stimuli (like light or sound) and\
sends signals to the brain to interpret.\
After this lesson, students will know that the brain and nerves form the nervous system,\
controlling everything we do. They will be able to name the five senses and know that the brain\
processes all sensory information. They will understand that the nervous system acts very fast,\
allowing us to react immediately (like pulling away from a hot object).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 7 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Which organ tells your muscles to move (e.g. to pick up a book)?\
Can you describe what happens when you smell something nice like cookies baking?\
Why do you feel pain when you touch a sharp object?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Brain and Spinal Cord: 
\f0\b0 The brain (inside the skull) and the spinal cord (running down\
the back) form the central nervous system. The brain has different parts for thinking,\
memory, and controlling movement.\

\f1\b Neurons and Signals: 
\f0\b0 Neurons send signals as fast electrical impulses. Nerve signals\
can be very fast (up to 150 miles/hour). This lets us react quickly (for example, reflexes\
like blinking or jerking away).\

\f1\b Five Senses: 
\f0\b0 The eyes have light-detecting cells (retina) that send images to the brain\
via optic nerves. The ears have tiny hairs and fluid that convert sound waves to nerve\
signals. The nose has smell receptors. The tongue has taste buds. The skin has sensors\
for pressure, temperature, and pain. All send messages to the brain.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What sense organs do you use when you taste your favorite food?\
How does the brain know if your leg muscles should move (think about instructions\
traveling).\
Why can\'92t you tickle yourself easily (hint: brain predicts self-movements)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Reflexes: 
\f0\b0 Some nerve pathways go through the spinal cord without waiting for the brain\
(like the knee-jerk reflex when a doctor taps your knee). This is for speed.\

\f1\b Brain Protection: 
\f0\b0 The brain and spinal cord are protected by the skull and vertebrae,\
and cushioned by fluid. This is why helmets and seatbelts are important.\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Neuroplasticity: 
\f0\b0 The brain can form new connections. For example, practicing a skill\
(like math or piano) makes certain brain pathways stronger.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Pick one sense (e.g. vision) and explain how the sense organ and nerves work together\
to let you experience it.\
Describe what happens (in order) when you hear your name called (from ear to brain to\
response).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 8 | Hormones and the Endocrine System
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about hormones and how glands regulate the body. We explain\
that hormones are chemical messengers made by special glands (endocrine glands) that travel\
in the bloodstream to control activities. For example, the pancreas produces insulin (a hormone)\
that signals cells to take up sugar from blood; if no insulin is made, blood sugar stays high\
(diabetes). Another example is the adrenal glands releasing adrenaline (epinephrine) when you\
are scared or exercise, which raises heart rate and blood sugar for quick energy. We describe\
other glands: the thyroid (controls metabolism and growth), pituitary (master gland that signals\
others), and ovaries/testes (releasing sex hormones for puberty and reproduction).\
After this lesson, students will know that the endocrine system complements the nervous\
system to regulate the body over longer times. They will understand that hormones control\
growth, energy use, and stress responses. They will also learn that hormone imbalance can\
cause conditions (like diabetes or growth disorders) and that puberty changes are due to\
hormones.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 8 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What might make your heart beat faster: running or watching TV? (hint: hormones)\
Why do you think teenagers get taller and develop facial hair or breasts?\
Can you name a situation where someone might feel a sudden rush of energy or\
alertness?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Endocrine Glands: 
\f0\b0 Major glands include the pituitary, thyroid, adrenal glands,\
pancreas, ovaries (in girls) and testes (in boys). These glands release hormones directly\
into the blood.\

\f1\b Hormone Functions: 
\f0\b0 Hormones regulate many processes. For example, insulin (from\
the pancreas) lowers blood sugar. Thyroid hormone (from thyroid gland) increases\
metabolism (how fast cells burn energy). Growth hormone (pituitary) makes bones and\
muscles grow. Sex hormones (testosterone/estrogen) trigger puberty changes.\

\f1\b Diabetes Example: 
\f0\b0 Type 1 diabetes happens when the pancreas makes little or no\
insulin (often a childhood disease). Type 2 diabetes is when cells stop responding well to\
insulin (often related to diet/obesity). In both, blood sugar remains too high.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What could happen if your thyroid gland stopped working (body temperature and energy\
levels)?\
Why might an athlete inject insulin (not that they should, but what does insulin do)?\
How does adrenaline help you if you accidentally face danger (e.g., a barking dog\
appears)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Puberty: 
\f0\b0 During adolescence, the pituitary gland signals ovaries/testes to release\
estrogen/testosterone. This causes voice changes, hair growth, menstruation, and\
development of adult body shape.\

\f1\b Feedback Loops: 
\f0\b0 Many hormone levels are controlled by feedback (like a thermostat).\
For example, if blood sugar is high, more insulin is made; when sugar is normal, insulin\uc0\u9679 \
production drops.\

\f1\b Hormone Disruptions: 
\f0\b0 Some chemicals (like certain pesticides) can act like hormones\
and disrupt the endocrine system; that\'92s why pollution can affect health.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Name one hormone and the gland that produces it, and explain what it does (e.g., insulin\
\'96 pancreas \'96 lowers blood sugar).\
Explain why eating a balanced diet and exercise can help prevent type 2 diabetes (hint:\
affects insulin use).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 9 | Hormones and the Endocrine System
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn the basics of the human reproductive system and how new life\
begins. We explain that males and females have different reproductive organs: for example,\
males have testes that produce sperm, and females have ovaries that release eggs. We\
describe fertilization simply: when a sperm and egg join, a new cell is formed which grows into a\
baby in the mother\'92s uterus. We also discuss puberty: the hormonal changes that make the\
body go from a child to an adult. For example, boys\'92 voices deepen and they grow facial hair,\
while girls develop breasts and start menstrual periods. We stress that these changes are\
normal parts of growing up.\
After this lesson, students will understand where babies come from in simple biological terms.\
They will know the main parts of male and female reproductive systems and the role of\
hormones in puberty. They will also learn the concept of pregnancy (gestation) and that a baby\
develops in the mother\'92s womb over nine months.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 9 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
At what age do people usually become capable of having children, and what changes\
happen in the body around that time?\
Why do you think it\'92s important to learn about the reproductive system and puberty?\
What is the difference between an egg cell and a sperm cell?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Male Reproductive System: 
\f0\b0 Males have testes (in the scrotum) that produce sperm\
and testosterone. Sperm travel through tubes (vas deferens) and exit via the penis.\

\f1\b Female Reproductive System: 
\f0\b0 Females have ovaries (in the pelvis) that release eggs\
(ova). When an egg is fertilized in the Fallopian tube, it implants in the uterus (womb)\
and develops into a baby. Females have a menstrual cycle (~28 days) which prepares\
the body for pregnancy each month.\

\f1\b Puberty: 
\f0\b0 Puberty is caused by hormones (from the brain\'92s pituitary gland). Boys start\
producing sperm and testosterone, leading to muscle growth and facial hair. Girls begin\
menstrual cycles and estrogen causes breast development and hip widening.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one purpose of puberty for human survival?\
How does the role of the uterus differ from that of the testes?\
Why is it important to talk to a parent or doctor when you have questions about puberty?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Baby Development: 
\f0\b0 In the uterus, the fertilized egg grows through stages (embryo \uc0\u8594 \
fetus). By about 9 months, a baby is born through the vagina (or by cesarean surgery if\
needed).\

\f1\b Reproductive Health: 
\f0\b0 It\'92s important to keep the reproductive organs clean and healthy.\
For example, girls should learn about menstrual hygiene (pads or tampons) and boys\
should learn about proper bathing.\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Genetic Contribution: 
\f0\b0 A child inherits half of their DNA from each parent. This is why\
children resemble both their mother and father.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
Describe in simple terms how a baby develops (egg + sperm \uc0\u8594  zygote \u8594  embryo \u8594 \
fetus).\
\uc0\u9679 \
List two changes you would expect during puberty and explain why they happen.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 10 | Infectious Diseases and Germs
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about germs and how infectious diseases spread. We explain that\
germs include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites; tiny organisms that can make us sick. We\
describe simple examples: bacteria like 
\f2\i Salmonella 
\f0\i0 can cause food poisoning if food is not\
cooked properly, and viruses like the flu virus cause influenza and colds. We explain ways\
diseases spread, such as coughing (spreading viruses through droplets), touching contaminated\
surfaces, or bites from insects. For example, we might discuss how washing hands prevents\
germs from entering the body. We stress that not all germs are bad (some live in our gut and\
help digestion), but infectious germs can be harmful.\
After this lesson, students will understand how germs cause illnesses and how infections can\
spread from person to person or through food/water. They will know basic prevention methods\
like handwashing, covering coughs, and avoiding contact with sick people. They will also know\
the difference between bacteria (living cells that antibiotics can kill) and viruses (tiny particles\
that need body cells to multiply).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 10 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think happens to make you feel sick when you have a fever?\
How might someone catch the flu from another person?\
Why is it a good idea to cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Types of Germs: 
\f2\i\b0 Bacteria 
\f0\i0 are single cells (some cause strep throat, others like E. coli\
can cause upset stomach). 
\f2\i Viruses 
\f0\i0 are smaller; they cause colds, flu, COVID-19, etc.\

\f2\i Fungi 
\f0\i0 can cause athlete\'92s foot or ringworm. 
\f2\i Parasites 
\f0\i0 (like worms) can also cause\
disease.\

\f1\b Transmission: 
\f0\b0 Germs spread in many ways: inhaling droplets when a sick person\
coughs/sneezes, touching your face after touching a contaminated surface (door handle,\
phone), or sharing items like utensils. Some diseases (like measles) spread very easily\
through the air, while others (like HIV) require blood contact.\

\f1\b Infection Prevention: 
\f0\b0 The body\'92s first defense is barriers: skin and mucus (like in the\
nose). Handwashing with soap removes germs from your hands. Disinfecting surfaces\
(like doorknobs) kills germs. Staying home when sick prevents spreading.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it important to finish all the medicine (antibiotics) your doctor gives you?\
Why don\'92t antibiotics work if you have a cold?\
How can germs in food be killed? Name a method (e.g., cooking, pasteurization).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Common Infections: 
\f0\b0 Some frequent infections in kids: strep throat (bacterial, causes\
sore throat), chickenpox (viral, causes itchy rash), and influenza (viral, causes fever and\
aches). Each has its own prevention and care.\

\f1\b Outbreaks: 
\f0\b0 When many people get sick at once, it\'92s called an outbreak or epidemic.\
Good hygiene and sometimes quarantines (keeping sick people separate) help stop\
outbreaks.\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Immune Memory: 
\f0\b0 After fighting off a germ, the immune system \'93remembers\'94 it. That\'92s\
why you often become immune to a disease after you recover (e.g., you usually get\
chickenpox only once).\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
List two ways you can avoid catching germs at school (e.g., handwashing).\
Explain the difference between a viral and bacterial infection in terms of treatment.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 11 | Vaccines and Medicines
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore how vaccines and medicines help prevent and treat diseases.\
We explain that a vaccine is a harmless form of a germ (or a piece of it) that is given by injection\
or mouth. Vaccines train the immune system by prompting it to make antibodies against a\
disease without causing illness. For example, a flu shot contains inactivated flu virus so the\
body learns to fight it. We also describe antibiotics (medicine that kill or stop bacteria) and\
contrast them with antiviral drugs. For example, penicillin (an antibiotic) can cure strep throat\
(bacterial) but not a cold (viral). We touch on pain relievers (acetaminophen, ibuprofen) that\
reduce fever and pain, and how doctors use different medicines to treat different illnesses.\
After this lesson, students will know that vaccines prevent diseases by preparing the immune\
system, and that antibiotics are used to treat bacterial infections. They will understand why we\
don\'92t give antibiotics for viral diseases and why completing a vaccine schedule is important for\
community health (herd immunity).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 11 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you get some vaccines as a baby, and some again before starting school?\
If you have a headache or fever, what kind of medicine might you take?\
Why is it bad to stop taking antibiotics before you finish all the pills (even if you feel\
better)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Vaccines: 
\f0\b0 Vaccines cause the body to produce protective antibodies. For example, a\
measles vaccine has a weakened virus that triggers immunity. If a vaccinated person\
later meets the real measles virus, their body is ready to destroy it quickly.\

\f1\b Antibiotics: 
\f0\b0 Antibiotics (like penicillin, amoxicillin) kill bacteria or stop their growth. They\
are useless against viruses. Overusing antibiotics (like taking them for a cold) can lead\
to resistant bacteria, which are harder to kill.\

\f1\b Other Medicines: 
\f0\b0 There are many other medicines: 
\f2\i Antivirals 
\f0\i0 (e.g., for influenza), 
\f2\i pain\
relievers/antipyretics 
\f0\i0 (acetaminophen or ibuprofen) to reduce fever and pain, and\

\f2\i antifungals 
\f0\i0 for fungal infections. Each medicine is designed for specific problems.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Should you get a flu vaccine every year? Why or why not?\
If someone has a sore throat and fever, how do doctors decide whether to give\
antibiotics or not?\
What is herd immunity and why do doctors encourage most people to get vaccinated?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Vaccination Schedule: 
\f0\b0 Children receive vaccines at certain ages (e.g., MMR for\
measles-mumps-rubella, DTaP for diphtheria-tetanus-whooping cough). Booster shots\
(extra doses) are needed so immunity stays strong.\

\f1\b Side Effects: 
\f0\b0 Most vaccines are very safe, but they may cause minor side effects (fever,\
sore arm) as the body builds immunity. Serious reactions are very rare.\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Discovery of Penicillin: 
\f0\b0 Penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 from a\
mold. Before antibiotics, simple bacterial infections could be fatal.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
Explain why diseases like polio and measles have become very rare in vaccinated\
countries.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Give an example of when an antibiotic should not be used (e.g., for the common cold)\
and explain why.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 12 | Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about diabetes mellitus, a common metabolic disease. We explain\
that diabetes occurs when the body cannot control blood sugar properly. In type 1 diabetes, the\
pancreas does not make enough insulin (often diagnosed in children or teens). In type 2\
diabetes, the body\'92s cells ignore insulin (often related to obesity). We describe the effects:\
without insulin, glucose stays in the blood, causing high blood sugar (hyperglycemia).\
Symptoms include excessive thirst, frequent urination (to rid excess sugar), fatigue, and blurred\
vision. We emphasize management: monitoring blood sugar, insulin injections for type 1, and\
diet/exercise to improve sensitivity for type 2.\
After this lesson, students will understand what diabetes is and how it affects the body. They will\
know why insulin is crucial for lowering blood glucose and what symptoms indicate high blood\
sugar. They will also learn that a healthy diet and exercise help prevent or manage type 2\
diabetes.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 12 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think a person with diabetes needs to check their blood sugar?\
What happens if blood sugar stays too high for a long time? (Hint: blood vessels and\
nerves)\
\uc0\u9679 \
How might eating a lot of candy affect someone at risk for type 2 diabetes?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Insulin Function: 
\f0\b0 Insulin (from the pancreas) tells body cells to take in glucose from the\
blood to use for energy. When insulin is missing or ineffective, glucose builds up in the\
blood instead of entering cells.\

\f1\b Type 1 vs Type 2: 
\f0\b0 Type 1 diabetes usually starts in childhood \'96 the immune system\
attacks the pancreas cells that make insulin. Type 2 diabetes usually starts in adulthood\
and is linked to obesity and lifestyle; the body\'92s cells become resistant to insulin.\

\f1\b Symptoms and Risks: 
\f0\b0 High blood sugar over time can damage blood vessels and\
nerves (leading to heart disease, kidney damage, vision problems, and nerve pain).\
Early signs: frequent urination (kidneys expel excess sugar), extreme thirst, weight loss\
(cells can\'92t use glucose so body breaks down fat/muscle).\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is exercise an important part of managing diabetes?\
How does insulin therapy help a person with type 1 diabetes?\
What long-term health problems can uncontrolled diabetes cause (name one)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Blood Sugar Monitoring: 
\f0\b0 People with diabetes use a glucometer to prick their finger\
and measure blood sugar levels. This helps them manage diet and insulin doses.\

\f1\b Diet Tips: 
\f0\b0 A diabetic diet focuses on whole grains, vegetables, lean proteins, and\
controlled portions of carbohydrates to keep blood sugar stable.\

\f1\b Family Risk: 
\f0\b0 Genetics play a role in type 2 diabetes: if close family members have it,\
your risk is higher. However, maintaining a healthy weight and active lifestyle greatlyreduce that risk.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
List two differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Explain why someone with diabetes might feel tired or hungry, even after eating a meal.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 13 | Heart Disease and Lifestyle
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about heart disease and how lifestyle affects the circulatory\
system. We explain that coronary heart disease happens when arteries to the heart muscle\
become narrowed by fatty deposits (cholesterol plaques). Over time, this can reduce blood flow,\
causing chest pain (angina) or a heart attack (when blood supply is suddenly cut off). We\
discuss risk factors: unhealthy diet (high in saturated fats), lack of exercise, smoking (which\
damages vessels), and high blood pressure. For example, diets high in fried foods can increase\
\'93bad\'94 cholesterol, clogging arteries. We stress prevention: a balanced diet, regular exercise, and\
not smoking keep the heart and vessels healthy.\
After this lesson, students will understand that heart disease is often caused by blocked\
arteries, and that many risk factors are controllable. They will know why eating fruits and\
vegetables, exercising, and avoiding smoking help keep the heart strong.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 13 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think might clog an artery over many years?\
How does exercise help your heart, even though it makes your heart beat faster?\
What could happen if an artery to the brain is blocked (hint: stroke)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Artery Health: 
\f0\b0 Blood vessels (arteries) can get stiff and clogged by plaque (made of fat\
and cholesterol) especially if diet is unhealthy or if blood pressure is high.\

\f1\b Heart Attack: 
\f0\b0 If an artery to the heart is fully blocked, part of the heart muscle can die\
(heart attack). This causes severe pain and is life-threatening. Speedy treatment (like\
clot-busting drugs) can save heart tissue.\

\f1\b Prevention: 
\f0\b0 Eating foods rich in fiber (whole grains, fruits, vegetables) and low in\
saturated fat lowers cholesterol. Regular aerobic exercise (running, swimming) makes\
the heart stronger and blood vessels more flexible. Not smoking greatly reduces the risk\
of vessel damage.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do doctors check cholesterol levels? What is a healthy level of LDL (\'93bad\
cholesterol\'94)?\
How does high blood pressure (\'93hypertension\'94) stress the heart over time?\
Explain why someone who smokes is more likely to have heart disease.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Signs of a Heart Attack: 
\f0\b0 Usually intense chest pain (often radiating to arm or jaw),\
shortness of breath, cold sweat, or nausea. It\'92s an emergency.\

\f1\b Medical Treatments: 
\f0\b0 In a heart attack, doctors may use a stent (a tiny wire mesh) to\
keep an artery open or perform bypass surgery to restore blood flow.\

\f1\b Relaxation: 
\f0\b0 Chronic stress (from school or home) can raise blood pressure. Relaxation\
techniques (deep breathing, hobbies) can indirectly protect heart health.
\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Identify two habits that help reduce the risk of heart disease and explain why they help.\
Describe what an artery is and how it is different from a vein (think of direction of blood\
flow and pressure).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 14 | Cancer and Cell Growth
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about cancer in basic terms. We explain that cancer is a disease of\
the cells: normally, cells grow and divide in a controlled way. Cancer happens when cells grow\
uncontrollably and do not die when they should. This can lead to tumors (masses of cells) that\
can spread to other parts of the body (metastasis). We may mention a few common types:\
leukemia (blood cells become cancerous), lymphoma (lymphatic cells), or solid tumors (in\
organs like breast, lung). We also discuss risk factors: some are random (DNA mistakes), and\
some are lifestyle-related (smoking, UV exposure from sun, certain viruses like HPV). For\
example, smoking can cause lung cancer because tobacco chemicals damage DNA in lung\
cells.\
After this lesson, students will know that cancer is caused by genetic mutations leading to\
uncontrolled cell growth. They will understand that cancer cells can spread, and that early\
detection (like skin checks or doctor exams) improves outcomes. They will also learn the\
general idea of treatments: surgery to remove tumors, chemotherapy (drugs that kill\
fast-growing cells), and radiation therapy (high-energy rays to target cancer cells).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 14 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think doctors do biopsies (take a small piece of tissue) when they suspect\
cancer?\
How might ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun be related to skin cancer?\
Can you think of a reason why smoking can cause cancer (think about DNA and cells)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Uncontrolled Growth: 
\f0\b0 Cancer cells ignore the normal signals that tell cells to stop\
dividing. They can form lumps (tumors) or flood the bloodstream.\

\f1\b Metastasis: 
\f0\b0 Some cancer cells can spread through blood or lymph to distant organs.\
For example, breast cancer cells can sometimes travel to lungs or bones.\

\f1\b Prevention and Detection: 
\f0\b0 Avoiding known risks (like smoking, excessive sun\
exposure, unhealthy diet) helps prevent some cancers. Regular doctor check-ups (like\
skin exams or screening tests) can catch cancer early, when it\'92s easier to treat.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one difference between a benign (non-cancerous) tumor and a malignant\
(cancerous) tumor?\
Why might chemotherapy cause side effects like hair loss or nausea? (Hint: think about\
what cells chemo affects)\
How does the immune system play a role in preventing cancer? (Hint: some immune\
cells destroy abnormal cells)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Types of Mutagens: 
\f0\b0 Mutagens are things that can cause DNA damage. These include\
UV light, tobacco smoke chemicals, and certain viruses.\

\f1\b Cancer Treatments: 
\f0\b0 Surgery removes tumors. Chemotherapy uses drugs that target\
rapidly dividing cells (cancer but also hair cells, which is why hair falls out). Radiation\
therapy targets cancer cells with rays. There are also newer treatments like\
immunotherapy (boosting your immune system to fight cancer).\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Cancer Cells: 
\f0\b0 Unlike normal cells, cancer cells often have irregular shape, multiple\
nuclei, and don\'92t stick together well (so they can break away and spread).\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Explain in your own words why reducing risk factors (like not smoking) is important for\
preventing cancer.\
Name one type of cancer and describe how it affects the body (e.g., lung cancer\
affecting breathing).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 15 | Asthma, Allergies, and Respiratory\
Illnesses
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about common respiratory problems like asthma and allergies. We\
explain that asthma is a condition where the airways in the lungs become narrow and inflamed,\
making it hard to breathe. Triggers can include dust, pollen, exercise, or cold air. For example, a\
child with asthma might use an inhaler (with medication) when they wheeze. We also describe\
allergies: when the immune system overreacts to harmless things (allergens) like pollen, pet\
dander, or peanut protein. Allergies can cause sneezing, itching, hives (skin rash), or even\
life-threatening reactions (anaphylaxis) in severe cases. We stress how avoiding triggers and\
using medications (inhalers for asthma, antihistamines or EpiPens for allergies) can control\
these conditions.\
After this lesson, students will understand that asthma affects breathing by tightening air\
passages and that allergies are immune reactions to ordinary substances. They will know that\
these are not contagious and often start in childhood. They will learn the importance of\
recognizing triggers (like smoke or certain foods) and seeking medical help when needed.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 15 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think happens inside your lungs when you have a coughing fit or\
wheezing?\
Can someone \'93catch\'94 asthma or allergies from another person? Why or why not?\
Why might someone carry an inhaler or an EpiPen with them?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Asthma: 
\f0\b0 During an asthma attack, the muscles around bronchial tubes tighten and\
lining swells, reducing airflow. Symptoms: wheezing (a whistling sound), shortness of\
breath, chest tightness, cough. Asthma inhalers usually contain bronchodilators (to open\
airways) or steroids (to reduce inflammation).\

\f1\b Allergic Reactions: 
\f0\b0 The body mistakes a harmless substance (like pollen or peanut\
protein) as a threat and releases histamine (a chemical). This causes allergy symptoms:\
runny nose, watery eyes, rash (hives), or in severe cases, throat swelling. Antihistamine\
medicines (like Benadryl) block histamine effects.\

\f1\b Triggers and Prevention: 
\f0\b0 Common asthma triggers: dust mites, pet hair, pollen,\
exercise, cold air, cigarette smoke. Allergy triggers depend on the person (foods, mold,\
insect stings). Avoiding known triggers (like keeping pets out of bedrooms, using\
allergy-proof covers on pillows) helps reduce attacks.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How is treating asthma similar to treating an allergic reaction?\
What could happen if someone with a severe allergy (like peanuts) accidentally eats\
them?\
Why might exercise be good for health but tricky for someone with asthma (hint:\
exercise-induced asthma exists)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Air Quality: 
\f0\b0 Air pollution (smog, smoke) makes asthma worse. Wearing masks or\
staying indoors on bad-air days can help.\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Allergy Tests: 
\f0\b0 Doctors can do skin or blood tests to see what someone is allergic to. For\
example, a small needle prick with a tiny amount of allergen and watching for a reaction.\

\f1\b Long-term Control: 
\f0\b0 Asthma patients often use daily preventive inhalers (steroids) even\
when not having an attack, to keep airways calm.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Describe the difference between an asthma attack and an allergic reaction (consider\
symptoms and triggers).\
Give two examples of things that can trigger asthma or allergies and say how to avoid\
them.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 16 | Healthy Habits and Prevention
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about healthy lifestyle habits and preventive measures for overall\
health. We focus on how choices in diet, exercise, and hygiene help prevent many diseases.\
For example, eating a balanced diet (fruits, vegetables, whole grains) and exercising daily help\
maintain a healthy weight and heart. We explain that regular exercise strengthens the heart and\
lungs and helps control blood sugar and cholesterol. Good hygiene is also covered: washing\
hands, brushing teeth, and safe food handling to prevent infections. We might mention public\
health actions like vaccinations and wearing seatbelts. The key idea is that many health\
problems can be prevented by daily habits.\
After this lesson, students will be able to name several healthy habits (balanced diet, exercise,\
sleep, cleanliness) and explain how they keep the body strong. They will know that preventive\
care (like dentist visits, immunizations, handwashing) is just as important as treatment, because\
\'93an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.\
\'94
\fs51\fsmilli25995 16 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do doctors tell you to get plenty of sleep? How does sleep help your body?\
What are some healthy snacks versus unhealthy snacks? Why is this important?\
How does exercise affect your mood and energy level?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Balanced Diet: 
\f0\b0 Eating a variety of foods gives essential nutrients. Whole grains, fruits,\
and vegetables provide fiber and vitamins; protein foods help build tissue. Limiting sugar\
and junk food prevents obesity and related diseases. Drinking plenty of water helps\
kidneys and brain function.\

\f1\b Regular Exercise: 
\f0\b0 Physical activity (like walking, biking, sports) keeps muscles strong,\
burns excess fat, and helps the heart and lungs work efficiently. Exercise releases\
endorphins, chemicals in the brain that improve mood.\

\f1\b Hygiene and Safety: 
\f0\b0 Simple habits prevent illness: washing hands removes germs;\
brushing teeth prevents cavities and gum disease; cooking meat thoroughly kills\
bacteria. Safety measures (seatbelts, helmets) prevent injuries.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Name one way to keep your immune system strong (e.g. sleep, nutrition, exercise).\
Why is it important to visit the dentist regularly?\
How can handwashing prevent disease? Describe the process (soap, rubbing, rinsing).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Vaccinations: 
\f0\b0 Staying up to date with vaccines (like flu shots or tetanus booster) is a\
key preventive measure. This was covered in Lesson 11, but remember: vaccines\
protect you and those around you.\

\f1\b Stress Management: 
\f0\b0 Mental health matters too. Talking about feelings, having hobbies,\
and taking breaks reduce stress, which in turn keeps the body healthier (stress can\
weaken immunity).\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Sun Safety: 
\f0\b0 Too much sun exposure can cause skin damage and cancer. Using\
sunscreen and wearing hats protects skin cells.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Create a simple daily schedule that includes at least three healthy habits (e.g.\
fruits/veggies, 30 minutes of play, 8 hours of sleep).\
Explain why washing hands for 20 seconds is more effective than a quick rinse.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 17 | Medical Technology and\
Diagnostics
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about common medical tools and diagnostic tests. We explain that\
doctors use various instruments and technologies to check health and diagnose problems\
without guessing. For example, a stethoscope is used to listen to heartbeats and lung sounds. A\
thermometer measures body temperature to detect fever. We describe blood tests: a small\
blood sample can be analyzed for sugar level, infection markers, or blood cell counts. For\
imaging, we review that X-rays let doctors see bones (and check for fractures), MRI/CT scans\
show detailed images of organs, and ultrasounds use sound waves to view internal organs or\
babies during pregnancy. We emphasize how these tools help doctors make accurate\
diagnoses.\
After this lesson, students will know several medical tools and what they do. They will\
understand that these tools help detect health issues early (like catching pneumonia on an\
X-ray or anemia via blood test). They will also learn that technology in medicine is always\
improving (for example, wearable devices can monitor heart rate at home).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 17 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What tool would a doctor use to check if you have a fever?\
How do you think doctors find out if someone has anemia (low red blood cells)?\
Why might a doctor want to take an X-ray of your arm after a fall?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Basic Tools: 
\f2\i\b0 Stethoscope: 
\f0\i0 Listens to heart and lung sounds (a murmur or wheeze can\
signal a problem). 
\f2\i Otoscope: 
\f0\i0 Looks into ears. 
\f2\i Blood pressure cuff\
(sphygmomanometer): 
\f0\i0 Measures blood pressure. 
\f2\i Thermometer: 
\f0\i0 Checks for fever.\

\f1\b Laboratory Tests: 
\f0\b0 A small vial of blood can tell a lot (glucose level, white blood cell\
count for infection, cholesterol). Urine tests check kidney function and detect sugar or\
proteins.\

\f1\b Imaging: 
\f0\b0 X-rays pass through the body to create images of bones (white on film). MRI\
(using magnets) and CT (X-ray cross-sections) create detailed pictures of soft tissues\
(brain, organs). Ultrasound (sound waves) images are used for viewing the heart and\
growing fetus. These help doctors see inside without surgery.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Which test would show if someone swallowed a small toy, and why?\
Why is a blood pressure reading given as two numbers (e.g., 120/80)? What does the\
top number mean?\
How can doctors use a microscope in diagnosis? (Hint: looking at blood or tissue\
samples)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Home Health Tech: 
\f0\b0 Devices like heart monitors (EKG/ECG machines) record heart\
rhythms. Smartwatches can now alert if your heart rate is too high or irregular.\

\f1\b Genetic Testing: 
\f0\b0 In some cases, doctors analyze your DNA for mutations (like BRCA\
genes) to predict disease risk (covered in Lesson 2 basics).\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Safety: 
\f0\b0 Imaging like X-ray involves radiation, so doctors use the lowest dose needed\
and protect other body parts with shields.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Match each tool to its use: stethoscope, MRI, thermometer, microscope (heart sounds;\
body heat; cells and germs; organ images).\
Explain why a blood test and an X-ray can give very different but important information\
about a patient\'92s health.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 18 | First Aid and Emergency Response
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about common medical tools and diagnostic tests. We explain that\
doctors use various instruments and technologies to check health and diagnose problems\
without guessing. For example, a stethoscope is used to listen to heartbeats and lung sounds. A\
thermometer measures body temperature to detect fever. We describe blood tests: a small\
blood sample can be analyzed for sugar level, infection markers, or blood cell counts. For\
imaging, we review that X-rays let doctors see bones (and check for fractures), MRI/CT scans\
show detailed images of organs, and ultrasounds use sound waves to view internal organs or\
babies during pregnancy. We emphasize how these tools help doctors make accurate\
diagnoses.\
After this lesson, students will know several medical tools and what they do. They will\
understand that these tools help detect health issues early (like catching pneumonia on an\
X-ray or anemia via blood test). They will also learn that technology in medicine is always\
improving (for example, wearable devices can monitor heart rate at home).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 18 | Content
\f1\b\fs21\fsmilli10995 Starter Questions:\

\f0\b0 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
If you see someone fall and scrape their knee, what should you do first?\
What number do you dial in an emergency in this country (e.g., 911 in the US)?\
How do you know if someone needs CPR (hint: check if they are breathing)?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Key Points:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Bleeding: 
\f0\b0 For bleeding wounds, apply firm pressure with a clean cloth or bandage to\
stop bleeding. Raise the injured part if possible. If bleeding is severe or doesn\'92t stop,\
seek medical help.\

\f1\b Burns: 
\f0\b0 Cool a burn under running cool (not ice) water for several minutes. Cover with a\
clean non-sticky dressing. Do not apply toothpaste or oils. Severe burns require\
emergency care.\

\f1\b Choking: 
\f0\b0 If someone can\'92t speak or cough, they are choking. For a child/teen, perform\
back blows (stand behind, bend forward, and give 5 sharp blows between the shoulder\
blades). If that fails, do abdominal thrusts (Heimlich maneuver) if trained. Always tell an\
adult or call 911 if someone is choking and cannot breathe.\

\f1\b CPR (Basic): 
\f0\b0 If someone is unresponsive and not breathing normally, begin CPR: give\
30 chest compressions (pushing hard and fast in the center of the chest) and 2 rescue\
breaths (cover mouth and blow air into their lungs) if trained. Continue until help arrives.\

\f1\b Questions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What is the most important first step before doing any first aid (hint: think about safety)?\
Why should you never give an unconscious person something to drink, even water?\
In case of an emergency, why is it important to remain calm and speak clearly when\
calling for help?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 More to Learn:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Allergic Reactions: 
\f0\b0 If someone has a severe allergy and difficulty breathing (e.g., from\
peanuts), using an epinephrine auto-injector (EpiPen) immediately can be life-saving\
(follow instructions on the device).\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \

\f1\b Stroke Recognition: 
\f0\b0 A medical emergency where a blood vessel in the brain is\
blocked. The \'93FAST\'94 rule helps: Face drooping, Arm weakness, Speech difficulty, Time\
to call emergency number.\

\f1\b Practice Makes Prepared: 
\f0\b0 Children and teens can learn and practice first aid skills\
(often through school programs or Red Cross courses). Knowing what to do in an\
emergency can help protect your family and community.\

\f1\b Skill Check:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf2 \uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Describe the steps you would take if you found a friend unconscious at school (check\
responsiveness, call for help, begin CPR if needed).\
List three situations where you should call emergency services immediately.\
33}