{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-ItalicMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cspthree\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs51\fsmilli25995 \cf2 1 | The Human Body and Its Systems
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore the human body as a collection of working systems. We explain\
that the body has many parts (such as bones, muscles, heart, lungs, brain and stomach) that\
each belong to a system with a special role. These systems must cooperate. For example,\
bones and muscles work together so we can stand and walk; the heart and blood vessels work\
with the lungs so cells get oxygen; and nerves from the brain communicate with all parts of the\
body. This overview introduces the names of major systems (skeletal, muscular, circulatory,\
respiratory, etc.) and shows that health depends on all systems working in harmony.\
After this lesson, students will understand that the body is organized into different systems, and\
they can name the main systems and their jobs. They will know that organs (like the heart or\
brain) are part of these systems and that systems collaborate to keep us alive and healthy.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 1 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 1: The Human Body and Its Systems\
The human body is made of many parts (bones, muscles, heart, lungs, brain, stomach, etc.),\
each in a system with a special role. These systems must work together. Each system (like\
skeletal, muscular, circulatory, respiratory, nervous) has a main job, and health depends on\
them cooperating.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name one system in the body and its main function.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it important that body systems work together?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Give an example of two systems collaborating (e.g. running requires which systems?).\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Major body systems include skeletal (bones), muscular (muscles), circulatory\
(heart/vessels), respiratory (lungs), nervous (brain/nerves), digestive, and others.\
Bones (skeletal) and muscles (muscular) work together: bones provide shape/support\
and protect organs, while muscles pull on bones to move. For example, the ribcage\
(bones) shields the heart and lungs.\
The heart and blood vessels (circulatory system) work with the lungs (respiratory\
system) to pump oxygenated blood to every cell. The brain and nerves (nervous system)\
send messages between the brain and body parts.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
If the heart stopped working, how would that affect other systems?\
Which system carries oxygen to cells? Which removes carbon dioxide?\
How do bones, muscles, and nerves work together to let you pick up a ball and throw it?\
More to Learn:\
Organs are parts of systems (e.g. heart is an organ of the circulatory system, lungs are organs\
of the respiratory system, brain of the nervous system). Each organ is made of tissues of cells.\
Cells form tissues, tissues form organs, and organs form systems.Keeping all systems healthy (through nutrition, exercise, rest) ensures the whole body works\
well.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Give an example of an organ and the system it belongs to.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why must your respiratory and circulatory systems work together when you exercise?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does the skeletal system help the muscular system in movement?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 2 | Cells \'96 Building Blocks of Life
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson introduces cells, the smallest units of life in our bodies. Students learn that \'93cells are\
the basic building blocks of the body\'94\
. Every tissue and organ is made of many cells. We explain\
that cells are too small to see without a microscope and that the human body contains trillions of\
them. Each cell has a job (for example, muscle cells help us move, and brain cells send\
signals). The lesson describes how cells divide and make more cells to grow and replace old or\
injured ones. Children will get the idea that healthy tissues (muscle, bone, skin, etc.) are built\
from lots of healthy cells working together.\
By the end of this lesson, learners will know that cells form all tissues and organs. They will\
remember that groups of similar cells make tissues, and different tissues together make an\
organ. They will understand that our body parts (like heart or kidney) are made of specialized\
cells arranged into tissues and organs, following the pattern: 
\f1\i cells \uc0\u8594  tissues \u8594  organs \u8594 \
systems 
\f0\i0 .
\fs51\fsmilli25995 2 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 2: Cells \'96 The Building Blocks of Life\
Cells are the tiny units of life in our bodies; they are the basic building blocks of the body. Every\
tissue and organ is made of many cells. Cells are so small we need a microscope to see them,\
but our body has trillions. Each cell has a job (e.g. muscle cells help us move, nerve cells send\
signals). Cells can divide to make new cells, which helps us grow and heal.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is a cell? Can you name one type of cell?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think cells multiply when we grow?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How would you explain \'93building block\'94 when talking about cells?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Cells are tiny but numerous: the body contains trillions of cells. Each type of cell has a\
function (muscle cells contract for movement, nerve cells send messages). Groups of\
similar cells form tissues.\
When we eat and play, cells need to divide to grow new tissue and replace old or injured\
cells. Cell division copies the cell\'92s genes so the new cell is like the original.\
Cells organize life: many similar cells make a tissue, and different tissues combine to\
make an organ. For example, heart muscle cells form cardiac tissue, and cardiac tissue\
(with other tissue types) makes the heart organ.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why can\'92t we see cells without a microscope? How do we know they exist?\
What happens to your muscles if the muscle cells could not divide?\
Can you describe the path from a cell to a tissue to an organ (choose any organ)?\
More to Learn:\
Cells keep tissues healthy. Healthy muscle tissue comes from healthy muscle cells working\
together. If cells multiply healthily, organs grow and work well.\
Remember: cells \uc0\u8594  tissues \u8594  organs \u8594  systems. This pattern repeats at each level of our\
body\'92s organization.Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is an example of two different tissues working together in one organ?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does cell division help a scraped knee heal?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it important that cells accurately copy their DNA when they divide?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 3 | Tissues and Organs
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Building on cells, this lesson explains tissues and organs. Students will learn that tissue is a\
group of similar cells working together, and an organ is made of several tissues. For example,\
muscle tissue in your arm is made of muscle cells, and your stomach is an organ made of\
muscle tissue plus other tissue types. We can use the example: skin is an organ made mainly of\
skin cells (a tissue), and the heart is an organ made of heart muscle tissue and other tissues.\
This lesson helps students see the big picture: cells build tissues, tissues form organs, and\
organs make systems.\
After this lesson, students will be able to explain that similar cells form tissues, and different\
tissues together make up an organ. They will know examples of organs (like brain, stomach,\
skin) and recognize that each organ has many tissues (for instance, muscle and nerve tissues\
in the heart and brain). This reinforces the idea that cells are organized into higher levels\
(tissues and organs) in the body.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 3 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 3: Tissues and Organs\
Tissues are groups of similar cells working together, and organs are made of two or more tissue\
types. For example, muscle tissue is made of muscle cells, and your stomach is an organ made\
of muscle tissue plus other tissues. Groups of cells make tissues, and groups of tissues form\
organs. This shows that cells build tissues, tissues make organs, and organs make systems.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is a tissue? What is an organ? How are they different?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name an organ in your body and guess what tissues it might have.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think tissues and organs are important for the body?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
A tissue is a group of similar cells doing a job. For example, muscle tissue is many\
muscle cells working together. Skin tissue is many skin cells joined in layers.\
An organ is made of different tissues. For example, the heart is an organ with muscle\
tissue (to pump), nerve tissue (to regulate heartbeat), and blood vessel tissue (to carry\
blood). The stomach organ has muscle tissue (to churn food) and lining tissue (to protect\
and digest).\
Think of a house: cells are like bricks, tissues are like walls, and organs are like rooms.\
Each level builds on the smaller ones.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What tissue types do you think are in your heart? (e.g. muscle for pumping)\
How does skin show both tissue and organ levels (hint: skin itself is an organ)?\
Can two different organs share a tissue type? (Hint: muscle tissue is in your heart and in\
muscles in legs.)\
More to Learn:\
Examples: Skin is an organ made mostly of skin cells (epidermis tissue) and inner skin layers.\
The stomach is an organ made of muscle tissue (to move food), inner lining tissue (for digestive\
juices), and connective tissues.Recognizing that cells \uc0\u8594  tissue \u8594  organ helps us understand the body\'92s structure.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Describe the layers (tissyes) you would find in a tooth (hint: enamel is one tissue).\
How do tissues help an organ perform its function (e.g., stomach tissues digest food)?\
Why is it helpful that tissues are made of similar cells?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 4 | Skeletal System \'96 Bones and Joints
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, learners study the skeletal system. We describe that the skeleton is the body\'92s\
support framework of hard, strong bones. Children learn that humans have more than 200\
bones in their bodies. These bones give the body shape and protect soft organs (for example,\
the ribcage shields the heart and lungs). We explain how bones connect at joints (like knees\
and elbows) and how a joint allows movement (like a hinge or ball-socket). Students also hear\
that bones store minerals (like calcium) and contain bone marrow where blood cells are made.\
Overall, this lesson shows how the skeleton provides structure, protection, and support for\
movement.\
By the end of the lesson, students will know that bones form a sturdy framework for the body.\
They will remember that the skeleton supports the body and protects organs. They will be able\
to name examples of bones (skull, ribs, femur) and joints (elbow, knee), and explain that\
together bones and joints let us stand upright, move, and keep the body protected.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 4 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 4: Skeletal System \'96 Bones and Joints\
The skeletal system is the body\'92s support framework made of bones and joints. The human\
skeleton has about 206 bones in adults. These hard bones give the body shape and protect soft\
organs (for example, the ribcage shields the heart and lungs). Joints (like knees and elbows)\
are places where two bones meet and allow movement (hinge joints like knees flex,\
ball-and-socket joints like hips rotate). Bones also store minerals like calcium and contain bone\
marrow, where blood cells are made.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
About how many bones do you think an adult human has?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do bones do for your body?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you point to a joint on your body (like knee or elbow)? What does it do?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
The skeleton provides a sturdy framework for the body. Bones support your weight and\
give you your shape. For example, the spine keeps you upright and the skull (head\
bone) protects the brain.\
Bones protect soft organs. Ribs protect the heart and lungs; the skull protects the brain;\
the pelvis protects parts of the digestive and reproductive systems.\
Bones meet at joints, which allow movement. For instance, elbow and knee are hinge\
joints that bend. Shoulder and hip are ball-socket joints that move in all directions.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Name two bones that protect vital organs and the organ they protect.\
How does the skeleton help you stand up and move?\
What might happen if you didn\'92t have knees or elbows?\
More to Learn:\
Bones have additional roles: they store minerals (like calcium and phosphorus) which\
strengthen bones, and bone marrow (inside some bones) makes new blood cells.Examples: Femur (thigh bone) is the longest bone, helping us walk; the ribs form the ribcage\
protecting chest organs.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What minerals do your bones store and why are they important?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do children\'92s bones grow stronger when they get enough calcium?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why might a doctor send you for an X-ray when you break a bone? (Hint: imaging, see\
below)
\fs51\fsmilli25995 5 | Muscular System \'96 Muscles and\
Movement
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson covers the muscular system and how muscles move our bodies. We explain that\
muscles are tissues that can contract (tighten) to pull on bones and create movement. Every\
arm, leg, and body part has muscles. The lesson notes that muscles not only move limbs but\
also perform other jobs: for example, the heart itself is a muscle that pumps blood, and smooth\
muscles in the stomach and intestines help digest food. We introduce the idea that people have\
different types of muscle (skeletal muscle for moving bones, cardiac muscle for the heart,\
smooth muscle in organs), but focus on the common idea that muscles provide movement.\
After this lesson, learners will understand that muscles attach to bones and make motion\
possible. They will know that muscle groups in arms and legs let us walk, run and lift. They will\
also recall that there are special muscles like the heart (cardiac muscle) and muscles in\
digestion. They can describe how a muscle contracts to bend an arm or how the heart muscle\
pumps blood, using the basic concept of muscle power.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 5 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 5: Muscular System \'96 Muscles and Movement\
The muscular system consists of tissues (muscles) that can contract (tighten) to move bones\
and parts of the body. When muscles contract, they pull on bones at joints to create motion. For\
example, the muscles in your legs and arms let you run, jump, and lift things. Muscles do more\
than move limbs: the heart itself is a muscle (cardiac muscle) that pumps blood, and smooth\
muscles in organs (like the stomach and intestines) help move food along.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is the heart called a muscle? What does it do?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you do with your muscles when you run or lift something?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name one voluntary muscle (you control) and one involuntary muscle (you don\'92t\
have to think about controlling)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Skeletal muscles attach to bones and pull on them to create voluntary movement. When\
you decide to move, your brain tells a muscle to contract, which causes your arm to lift\
or your leg to step forward.\
Muscle activity produces heat. When muscles work hard (exercise), your body warms\
up. Muscles also help maintain posture and protect internal organs.\
There are three types of muscle: skeletal (attached to bones, under conscious control),\
cardiac (the heart, works automatically), and smooth (in organs like stomach, intestines,\
blood vessels, work automatically). For example, the heart\'92s muscle (cardiac) pumps\
blood; smooth muscles in your stomach mix food.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How do muscles work with bones to bend your arm?\
What happens to your muscles when you eat a heavy meal (hint: smooth muscles in\
stomach)?\
Name one activity that uses smooth muscles (heart pumping, or stomach churning).More to Learn:\
Muscles work in groups: to bend an arm, the biceps muscle contracts while the triceps relaxes.\
When you run, muscles in your legs contract in sequence to make stepping possible.\
Exercise helps muscles grow stronger and more efficient. Keeping muscles healthy (through\
activity and proper nutrition) helps all movement.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do marathon runners have strong leg muscles?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does muscle activity help keep us warm?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What would happen if you couldn\'92t control your skeletal muscles (for example, you\
couldn\'92t think about lifting your arm)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 6 | Nervous System \'96 Brain and Nerves
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore the nervous system, including the brain, spinal cord, and nerves.\
We explain that nerves carry information and instructions between the brain and the rest of the\
body. For example, nerves send sensory information (like sights or sounds) to the brain, and the\
brain sends back instructions to muscles. The lesson highlights that the brain is the control\
center: it receives signals (what we see, hear, feel) and decides responses (move a hand, talk,\
think). We also mention that nerve cells (neurons) are the building blocks of the nervous system.\
The lesson introduces basic terms like \'93brain\'94 and \'93nerve,\
\'94 and shows how the brain and spinal\
cord are central parts of the system.\
After this lesson, learners will know that the brain and nerves together make the nervous\
system. They will be able to say that nerves carry signals (messages) to the brain and from the\
brain. They will understand that the brain interprets sensory input and controls muscles and\
actions. In summary, students will grasp that the nervous system allows us to sense the world\
and control our bodies.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 6 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 6: Nervous System \'96 Brain and Nerves\
The nervous system is made of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves throughout the body. The\
brain is the control center: it receives information from your senses (eyes, ears, etc.) and sends\
out instructions. Nerves carry information between the brain and body. For example, nerves\
send sensory signals (like touch or sound) to the brain, and the brain sends motor signals back\
to muscles. In short, the nervous system lets you sense the world and move or react.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What does your brain do when you touch something hot?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Which part of your body do you use to think?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name one nerve (like the spinal cord) and what it does?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Central parts: the brain and spinal cord; peripheral parts: all the nerves branching out.\
Nerves act like wires transmitting signals. For example, if you step on a sharp object,\
sensory nerves send a \'93pain\'94 message to your brain.\
Sensory nerves carry information (what you see, hear, feel) to the brain, and motor\
nerves carry instructions from the brain to muscles. The brain processes input and\
decides actions (like moving a hand).\
This system is how you can see, hear, speak, think, and react to things instantly. Without\
it, the body wouldn\'92t know what\'92s happening or how to respond.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What might happen if nerves in your arm were cut?\
Why is the spinal cord protected by your backbone?\
How do you blink your eyes when something comes towards you? (Hint: see and react\
via nerves)\
More to Learn:\
Neurons are nerve cells. They connect all parts of the body to the brain, making a network.\
Nerve signals are very fast (like an electrical current).Healthy nervous system: protect your brain (wear helmets), and keep nerves healthy (avoid\
injuries). The brain controls your movements and thoughts, so keeping it well-rested and\
oxygenated is important.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do the senses (eyes, ears) and nerves work together to tell your brain about the\
world?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think would happen if your brain couldn\'92t send signals to your legs?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is sleep important for the brain (hint: processing memory and recovery)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 7 | Circulatory System \'96 Heart and\
Blood Vessels
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson introduces the circulatory system, focused on the heart and blood vessels. We\
explain that the heart is a pump that pushes blood through a network of blood vessels (arteries\
and veins). The lesson emphasizes that blood carries oxygen and nutrients to every cell and\
carries away waste. For instance, blood circulates nutrients and oxygen and removes wastes.\
We describe how the heart (a muscle) beats to circulate blood: oxygen-rich blood from the lungs\
goes out to the body, and oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart and lungs. We also mention\
the circulatory role in immunity (blood carries infection-fighting cells). Overall, this lesson shows\
how the heart and vessels form a loop that sustains life.\
After the lesson, students will know the heart\'92s function as a pump and the path of blood through\
the body. They should be able to say that blood delivers oxygen and nutrients to cells and\
removes wastes. They will recall that the circulatory system includes the heart plus vessels and\
that it works with the respiratory system to supply oxygen. In short, learners will understand that\
healthy circulation is vital for all body parts.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 7 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 7: Circulatory System \'96 Heart and Blood Vessels\
The circulatory system (cardiovascular system) includes the heart and a network of blood\
vessels (arteries and veins). The heart is a muscle pump that pushes blood through the body.\
Blood carries oxygen and nutrients to every cell and removes wastes like carbon dioxide. In\
each beat, the heart sends oxygen-rich blood (from the lungs) out to the body, and brings\
oxygen-poor blood back to the lungs for more oxygen. The blood also carries immune cells that\
fight germs.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What organ pumps your blood? What would happen if it stopped?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does blood travel from the heart to the rest of the body?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you feel your pulse or heartbeat when you\'92re excited?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
The heart (a muscle) beats to circulate blood. Arteries carry blood away from the heart\
(usually oxygen-rich), veins carry blood to the heart (often oxygen-poor). Capillaries are\
tiny vessels where exchanges happen.\
Blood delivers oxygen and nutrients (from the digestive system) to cells and picks up\
carbon dioxide and wastes to carry away. This is essential: without blood flow, cells\
would starve and waste would build up.\
The circulatory system works closely with the respiratory system: lungs oxygenate blood,\
then the heart pumps it to body cells. It also helps the immune system by transporting\
white blood cells to fight infections.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Trace one drop of blood: heart \uc0\u8594  lungs \u8594  heart \u8594  body cells \u8594  heart. Name each step.\
What waste does the blood carry away when you exhale?\
How does exercise (like running) affect your heart rate and circulation?\
More to Learn:\
Good heart health: exercise (aerobic) strengthens the heart. For example, jogging or cycling\
improves cardiac endurance.Blood pressure: the pressure of blood on vessel walls; too high pressure can damage vessels,\
so diet and exercise help keep it normal.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why does your heart beat faster when you run?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How is the circulatory system connected to the digestive system? (Hint: after digestion,\
nutrients enter the blood)\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name one way to keep blood vessels healthy (e.g. eating vegetables, avoiding too much\
fat).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 8 | Respiratory System \'96 Lungs and\
Breathing
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, learners study the respiratory system. We explain that breathing brings oxygen\
into the body and removes carbon dioxide. The lungs are described as the key organs: each\
lung is filled with tiny sacs (alveoli) where gas exchange happens. More importantly, the\
respiratory system takes in oxygen and expels carbon dioxide and water. We describe how air\
enters through the nose or mouth, travels down the windpipe into the lungs, and oxygen passes\
into blood while carbon dioxide leaves blood to be exhaled. Students learn that the diaphragm\
(a muscle) helps expand the lungs for breathing. The lesson uses simple terms (lungs, inhale,\
exhale) and emphasizes that cells need oxygen from breathing to produce energy.\
After this lesson, students will know how breathing works. They will be able to explain that lungs\
take in oxygen which enters the blood, and that carbon dioxide is released when we breathe\
out. They should also recall that this oxygen in blood is carried by the circulatory system to all\
cells. In summary, they will understand that respiration (breathing) is how our body gets oxygen\
and removes a waste product, carbon dioxide.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 8 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 8: Respiratory System \'96 Lungs and Breathing\
The respiratory system brings air in and out of the body to exchange gases. Air enters through\
your nose or mouth, goes down the windpipe (trachea) into the lungs. In the lungs, tiny sacs\
called alveoli exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide with the blood. Oxygen from the air moves\
into the blood, and carbon dioxide (a waste gas) moves from blood into the alveoli to be\
exhaled. Breathing happens when the diaphragm (a muscle under the lungs) contracts and\
relaxes, making the lungs expand and release air.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What muscle do you feel move when you take a deep breath?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Which organ provides oxygen to your blood?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you breathe faster when you run or laugh hard?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Lungs are the key organs of the respiratory system. They take in oxygen from the air\
and remove carbon dioxide. Inhaling (breathing in) fills lungs with air; exhaling pushes\
air (with CO
\f2 \uc0\u8322 
\f0 ) out.\
Oxygen in the lungs passes into the bloodstream (via capillaries around alveoli), and\
carbon dioxide in blood passes into the lungs to exit the body.\
The diaphragm muscle controls breathing: when it moves down, lungs expand (inhaling);\
when it moves up, lungs contract (exhaling). We breathe automatically, and cells need\
that oxygen to make energy.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Explain how blood and lungs work together when you breathe out.\
Why do you feel sleepy if you hold your breath (hint: lack of oxygen)?\
What happens to the air you breathe out (carbon dioxide)?\
More to Learn:\
Healthy breathing: keep lungs clear by avoiding smoke and pollutants. Exercise also keeps\
lung capacity strong.Quick fact: we breathe about 12\'9620 times per minute at rest. This ensures a constant supply of\
oxygen.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How might asthma or a cold affect your breathing?\
Describe why nose breathing (instead of mouth) is helpful (hint: it filters and warms the\
air).\
How do you think lungs and brain work together? (Think about what triggers you to start\
breathing more or less.)
\fs51\fsmilli25995 9 | Digestive System \'96 Food into Energy
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson covers the digestive system and how food becomes fuel. We teach that eating gives\
the body material and energy to grow and work. Since animals need food for energy and growth\
they must change it into a form that the body can use via digestion. We explain the path of food:\
it goes from mouth \uc0\u8594  esophagus \u8594  stomach \u8594  small intestine \u8594  large intestine. At each\
stage, food is broken down: teth chew, stomach acid churns, and intestines use enzymes. We\
mention accessory organs like the liver and pancreas which add digestive juices. The key idea\
is that food is broken into nutrients (sugars, proteins, fats, vitamins, etc.), which then pass\
through the intestinal walls into the blood. Finally, blood carries these nutrients to cells for\
energy and building. This lesson will stress eating fruits, vegetables, grains, and protein for a\
balanced diet (though detailed nutrition is another lesson).\
After the lesson, learners will know the main parts of the digestive tract (mouth, stomach,\
intestines) and their roles. They will explain that digestion breaks down food so nutrients can\
enter blood. They will remember that nutrients from food give the body fuel and building blocks\
to grow. In essence, students will be able to describe in smple terms how the digestive system\
turns a sandwich or apple into the energy that makes them run and grow.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 9 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 9: Digestive System \'96 Food into Energy\
The digestive system breaks down food and absorbs nutrients so the body can use them. We\
start by eating food in the mouth (chewing with teeth). Food travels down the esophagus to the\
stomach, where it is churned with stomach acid. It then moves to the small intestine, where\
most digestion and nutrient absorption happens. The large intestine absorbs water and some\
vitamins, and prepares waste. Along the way, accessory organs help: the liver produces bile (to\
break down fats), and the pancreas adds enzymes. In the end, nutrients (sugars, proteins, fats,\
vitamins, minerals) pass into the blood through the intestinal walls. This gives us energy and\
materials to grow.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Where does digestion begin in your body? What happens there?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do we eat vegetables and protein as part of meals?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think happens to a cookie after you swallow it?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Food pathway: mouth (chew) \uc0\u8594  esophagus (tube to stomach) \u8594  stomach (mixes with\
acid to break food) \uc0\u8594  small intestine (breaks food into nutrients, which enter blood) \u8594 \
large intestine (absorbs water, forms solid waste).\
Nutrients: carbohydrates and fats provide energy, proteins repair and build body parts\
(muscles, organs). Vitamins and minerals (in fruits/veggies, milk, meat) keep the body\'92s\
systems working well (e.g. calcium for bones, vitamin C for healing).\
A balanced diet is important: fruits and vegetables supply vitamins, whole grains give\
sustained energy, and protein (meat, beans) builds muscles and cells. Unhealthy foods\
(too much sugar/fat) can cause problems like cavities or obesity.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why does a banana give you energy? Where does that energy come from?\
How does the body use protein from foods like meat and beans?\
What part of the digestive system absorbs water, and why is that important?More to Learn:\
Good digestion: chew well, eat slowly, and drink water. Fiber (from fruits/vegetables) helps\
move food along and keeps bowel movements regular.\
What\'92s left undigested becomes waste (feces) and is removed from the body. Keeping a healthy\
diet (lots of natural foods, enough water) keeps digestion working smoothly.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
How might skipping meals or eating too much junk food affect your body?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What helps food move through the digestive system (hint: muscles in intestines)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do doctors say to drink water and eat fiber for digestion?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 10 | The Five Senses \'96 Seeing, Hearing,\
and More
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson explores the five senses that help us experience the world: sight, hearing, smell,\
taste, and touch. We explain each sense organ and its job in clear terms. For example, eyes\
(vision) let us see colors and shapes; ears (hearing) let us detect sounds; nose (smell) senses\
scents; tongue (taste) detects flavors; and skin (touch) feels pressure, warmth, or pain. We use\
relatable examples (seeing a rainbow, hearing music) and link these sense organs to the brain\
(part of the nervous system). We emphasize how senses keep us safe and inform us (e.g.\
smelling smoke or feeling heat on skin).\
After this lesson, students will know the five senses and their associated organs. They will be\
able to list each sense with its organ (eyes for sight, ears for hearing, etc.) and give a simple\
description of what each does. They will recognize that all these senses send information to the\
brain (as connected to the nervous system lesson) so we can understand the world.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 10 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 10: The Five Senses \'96 Seeing, Hearing, and More\
Our five senses (sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch) help us experience the world. Each sense\
has special organs: eyes see (light, colors, shapes), ears hear (sounds), nose smells, tongue\
tastes, and skin feels touch (pressure), temperature, and pain. These senses send information\
to the brain so we can learn and react. For example, we see a rainbow (eyes) and our brain\
recognizes colors; we hear music (ears) and enjoy it. The five senses \'97 seeing, hearing,\
smelling, tasting, and touching \'97 help us to learn about our surroundings.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name the five senss and the organ for each. What does each one do?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you sense when you eat ice cream (which sense)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why would you use two senses together (e.g. sight and smell)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Eyes (vision): detect light and color, letting us see shapes and movement.\
Ears (hearing): pick up sound waves, allowing us to hear speech, music, and noises.\
Nose (smell): senses scents in the air (like flowers or smoke), alerting us to things (good\
and dangerous).\
Tongue (taste): has taste buds for sweet, sour, salty, bitter, umami, telling us flavors (like\
tasting an apple or chili).\
Skin (touch): distributed all over the body, senses pressure, heat/cold, pain. For\
example, feeling the warmth of the sun or a gentle touch on your arm.\
All these senses send signals through nerves to the brain to interpret (connects with the\
nervous system). They keep us safe (smelling smoke) and help learning (seeing a book,\
hearing a teacher).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Which sense would tell you a fruit is rotten before you eat it? (smell!)\
How do your eyes and ears work together when watching TV?\uc0\u9679 \
Give an example of a situation where you use touch and hearing (or any two senses)\
together.\
More to Learn:\
Sensory organs are part of body systems: eyes and ears are connected to the nervous system.\
The brain interprets signals like \'93the light is red\'94 or \'93that smells like cookies.\
\'94\
Protect your senses: don\'92t look at the sun or bright lights, keep ears away from loud sounds,\
taste food carefully (no licking unknown objects), wash hands to avoid bad smells/germs.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What might happen if you couldn\'92t use one of your senses (e.g., color-blind in sight)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is smell important for taste?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does your sense of touch help you avoid injury?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 11 | Skin \'96 The Body\'92s Protective\
Covering
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, children learn about the skin, the body\'92s largest organ. We explain that skin\
covers the entire outside of the body and has many important functions. For example, skin\
protects the body by shielding it from germs, cuts, and temperature changes. It is also where we\
feel touch, pain, and temperature through nerves. We cover basics: the outer layer (epidermis)\
and inner layer (dermis) with sweat glands, hair, and oils that keep skin healthy. Kids learn that\
skin keeps fluids in our body and harmful things out, and it helps regulate body temperature\
(sweating when hot). The lesson highlights that good hygiene (keeping skin clean) helps\
prevent infection.\
After the lesson, learners will know that skin acts like a barrier protecting organs and tissues.\
They will recall that skin is the outer layer of us humans. It protects the body from germs,\
injuries, and extreme temperatures. They will remember that our skin also lets us feel things\
(touch, pain, pressure). In summary, students will appreciate that healthy skin is essential for\
overall health and for sensing the environment.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 11 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 11: Skin \'96 The Body\'92s Protective Covering\
Skin is the body\'92s largest organ covering the entire outside surface. It protects the body from\
germs, injury, and extreme temperature changes. Skin has an outer layer (epidermis) and inner\
layer (dermis). It contains sweat glands, hair, and oil glands that keep it healthy. Skin also has\
many nerve endings so we can feel touch, pressure, pain, and temperature. For example,\
touching something hot triggers pain sensors in skin so you pull back. Good hygiene\
(cleanliness) keeps the skin barrier strong and prevents infections.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think skin does for your body?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do you feel if you touch something very cold or hot? Which organ senses that?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why should we wash our hands and skin regularly?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Skin acts like a barrier: it keeps germs and harmful substances out and keeps water and\
nutrients in. The outer layer stops many bacteria and cuts from reaching inside the body.\
Skin helps regulate temperature: when hot, we sweat (cooling effect); when cold, blood\
vessels tighten to keep us warm.\
We feel with skin: nerves in the skin send messages to the brain about touch, heat, cold,\
or pain. This sense of touch helps us respond (e.g., pulling away from a pinch or\
stepping around a sharp rock).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do cuts on the skin hurt? What is happening in the skin?\
How does your skin keep your body from drying out?\
Why is sun protection (sunscreen, clothing) important for skin?\
More to Learn:\
skin stay healthy.\
Skin health: keep it clean, moisturized, and protected from the sun. Drinking water also helpsSkin accessories: hair and nails are made from skin proteins; sweat keeps us cool; oil glands\
prevent skin from drying out.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How does skin work with the immune system to stop infections?\
Why might someone get goosebumps? (Hint: skin reaction to cold or fear)\
What can you do if your skin gets too dry or chapped?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 12 | Nutrition \'96 Food and Healthy Diet
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson focuses on nutrition and what foods do for the body. We explain that food is fuel: it\
gives energy for everything we do (running, thinking, growing). We introduce the idea of\
nutrients: proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, minerals, and water, and say each has a job.\
For instance, proteins build and repair tissues, carbs and fats provide energy, vitamins and\
minerals support health. We stress the importance of a balanced diet with fruits, vegetables,\
whole grains, and protein, and that treats should be limited. The lesson avoids strict dietary\
rules but encourages variety. Key safety points (like not eating something one is allergic to, or\
not overeating sugary snacks) may be mentioned.\
After this lesson, learners will know the basic nutrients in food and why we need them. They will\
be able to name examples (carrots for vitamins, meat for protein, etc.) and understand that\
eating different foods keeps the body strong. Students will remember that a varied, balanced\
diet helps their bodies have enough energy and building blocks for health.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 12 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 12: Nutrition \'96 Food and Healthy Diet\
Food is fuel for the body: it provides energy for everything we do (running, thinking, growing).\
Our body needs a variety of nutrients from food: carbohydrates and fats give energy, proteins\
build and repair tissues (like muscles and skin), vitamins and minerals support growth and\
health, and water is crucial too. A balanced diet includes fruits, vegetables, whole grains,\
proteins (meat, beans, eggs), and some dairy or alternatives. For example, carrots provide\
vitamins important for eyes, meat or beans give protein for muscle, and whole grains give\
long-lasting energy.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think breakfast is called the most important meal of the day?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What food would you eat to give your body strength to run or play?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name three types of foods (like protein, vegetable, fruit)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Proteins (meat, fish, eggs, beans) build and repair body parts (muscles, organs).\
Carbohydrates (bread, rice, fruits, vegetables) provide quick energy to move and think.\
Fats (nuts, oils, dairy) provide stored energy and help the body absorb vitamins.\
Vitamins and minerals (in fruits/veggies, milk, meat) keep the body\'92s systems working\
well (e.g. calcium for bones).\
Water is also vital; about 60% of our body is water. It transports nutrients, removes\
waste, and helps temperature control.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What are some healthy foods that give you protein?\
Why should we limit sugary snacks and fast food?\
How do fruits and vegetables help our body?More to Learn:\
only sometimes.\
Healthy habits: eat colorful fruits/vegetables, choose whole grains, drink water, and enjoy treats\
Avoid allergies/food bugs: wash fruits before eating; only drink pasteurized juice; don\'92t share\
utensils.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What happens if you don\'92t get enough vitamins (e.g., vitamin C or D)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does eating breakfast help your brain focus at school?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is hunger a sign that our body needs food (energy and nutrients)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 13 | Water \'96 Staying Hydrated
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson teaches why water is vital for life. We explain that the human body is mostly water,\
and every cell needs water to work. For example, water helps carry nutrients in the blood, flush\
out wastes through urine, and keep our temperature steady (we sweat when hot). As one\
source notes,\
\'93every cell must be bathed in water\'94 and water helps maintain body temperature.\
We make it clear that drinking clean water and other healthy fluids (like milk or juice) is\
important. The lesson may include how long hours of activity or hot weather makes us lose\
water through sweat, so we need to drink more. We also mention signs of dehydration (thirst,\
dark urine, tiredness).\
By the end of this lesson, students will know that water is an essential nutrient. They will\
understand that their body needs enough water to transport nutrients and eliminate waste. They\
will remember that \'93water makes up about 60% of the human body\'94 and that drinking water is\
needed daily for health. In summary, learners will grasp that staying well-hydrated is as\
important as food for a healthy body.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 13 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 13: Water \'96 Staying Hydrated\
Water is essential for life. About 60% of the human body is water, and every cell needs water to\
function. Water helps carry nutrients and oxygen to cells, and it carries wastes (like urea) away\
through urine. It also helps regulate body temperature (we sweat to cool down). That means we\
must drink enough clean water or healthy drinks (milk, juice) every day, especially when active\
or it\'92s hot. Signs of not enough water (dehydration) include feeling very thirsty, having dark\
yellow urine, or feeling tired.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What color is your pee when you\'92re well-hydrated versus when you\'92re dehydrated?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do you feel when you forget to drink water all day?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name two drinks that contain mostly water.\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Every cell in the body must be \'93bathed\'94 in water to work properly. Water carries nutrients\
in blood, helps digest food, and helps the kidneys remove waste.\
Normal body processes: sweating (cooling), urinating (waste removal), and breathing all\
use water. We lose water this way and must replace it by drinking.\
Recommended: children should drink several cups of water or healthy beverages daily.\
Avoid too much soda or sugary drinks.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How does water help your body when you exercise?\
Why is it important to drink water when you have a fever or play outside on a hot day?\
What happens in your body if you get dehydrated (hint: electrolyte balance)?\
More to Learn:\
Besides water, foods like fruits and soups provide hydration.\
If you exercise or play hard, you should drink extra fluids to make up for sweat loss.Safety: only drink clean water. At home, that\'92s usually tap or filtered water; when traveling,\
bottled or boiled water is safest.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What are some signs of dehydration you should watch for?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do kidneys need water to do their job?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How can drinking water help you think and focus better at school?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 14 | Exercise and Physical Fitness
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson emphasizes exercise and keeping the body active. We explain that regular\
movement and exercise make muscles and bones stronger, keep the heart and lungs healthy,\
and even improve mood and brain function. For example, weight-bearing exercise (running,\
jumping) strengthens bones, and aerobic activities (like playing tag or riding a bike) strengthen\
the heart. We also note that exercise helps children concentrate and learn better. Physical\
activity can even improve a person's thinking or cognition immediately after exercise. The\
lesson encourages fun activities (playing sports, dancing, etc.) as ways to be active every day,\
and warns about the importance of proper rest and hydration during exercise.\
After this lesson, students will know why being active is good for health. They will be able to say\
that exercise builds strong muscles and bones, helps the heart work well, and even helps them\
feel alert and happy (as supported by evidence of improved brain function). They should be able\
to list some exercise examples (running, jumping, climbing) and recognize that movement is an\
important part of staying healthy.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 14 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 14: Exercise and Physical Fitness\
Exercise keeps the body strong and healthy. Regular physical activity strengthens muscles and\
bones, improves heart and lung function, and even boosts mood and brain power. For example,\
running or jumping (weight-bearing activities) make bones denser (stronger). Aerobic activities\
like playing tag or riding a bike make the heart pump better and the lungs breathe more\
efficiently. Physical activity can improve children\'92s attention, memory, and overall brain health.\
Fun daily movement (games, sports, dance) is encouraged for at least 1 hour a day for kids.\
Don\'92t forget to rest and drink water during exercise.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name your favorite active game or sport. How does it make you feel?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you breathe harder and faster when you run?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you think of a time exercise helped you feel happier or more awake?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Stronger muscles and bones: Activities like running, jumping, climbing (weight-bearing)\
build bone strength. Lifting light weights or carrying a backpack also helps.\
Healthy heart and lungs: Aerobic exercise (soccer, swimming, dancing) makes the heart\
beat stronger and improves breathing. This means more oxygen gets to muscles and\
brain.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Better mood and learning: Exercise releases chemicals in the brain that improve mood\
and help with focus. Studies show kids often concentrate better after playing actively.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How many minutes of exercise do experts recommend for children each day? (Hint:\
about 60 minutes)\
Why is stretching or warm-up important before exercise?\
What is one strength/skill you improved by practicing a sport or activity?\
More to Learn:\
if it\'92s fun.\
Enjoyment: Pick activities you like (team sports, bike riding, jump rope). It\'92s easier to stick with itRest and safety: Always warm up first, wear appropriate shoes/clothing, and drink water. Rest\
(sleep) is also important for recovery.\
Daily movement: Even walking to school or taking stairs helps keep you active.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
How can exercise help prevent health problems (like childhood obesity)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do athletes need to eat extra food on days they train a lot?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name two activities you can do as a family to stay active (e.g., hiking, playing catch).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 15 | Sleep and Growth
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson covers sleep and why rest is important for health. We explain that growing children\
and teens need plenty of sleep for their bodies and brains to develop. For instance, growth\
hormones are released during deep sleep, and the brain processes memories while we rest. We\
mention recommended sleep times: school-age children generally need about 9\'9612 hours of\
sleep each night, and teens about 8\'9610 hours. The lesson also talks about good sleep habits:\
having a bedtime routine, sleeping in a dark room, and avoiding electronics right before bed.\
The idea is that proper sleep supports learning, mood, immune function, and physical growth.\
By the end of the lesson, learners will know that sleep is a key part of health. They will recall the\
recommended hours of sleep for their age (around 9\'9612 hours for children, slightly less for\
teens). They will understand that sleep helps the body repair itself and the brain remember what\
was learned. In summary, students will see sleep as an active process that helps them grow and\
stay well.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 15 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 15: Sleep and Growth\
Sleep is a vital time when the body and brain grow and repair. When we sleep, especially deep\
sleep, the body releases growth hormone that helps tissues grow. The brain also processes and\
stores what we learned during the day (memory consolidation). School-age children (6\'9612\
years) generally need about 9\'9612 hours of sleep per night, and teenagers need about 8\'9610\
hours. Having a routine (bedtime schedule, dark room, no screens before bed) helps us fall\
asleep faster and get better rest.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is your bedtime on school nights? Do you feel rested in the morning?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think kids need more sleep than adults?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Have you ever noticed you\'92re hungrier or grumpier when you don\'92t sleep enough?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Growth and repair: While we sleep, the body grows and repairs itself. Muscles recover,\
and bones grow. Even the immune system works better with enough sleep.\
Brain function: Sleep helps brain development and learning. After a good night\'92s sleep,\
we concentrate better and remember things more easily.\
Recommended sleep: Children (6\'9612 yrs) should get about 9\'9612 hours; teens (13\'9618\
yrs) about 8\'9610 hours. Staying up too late or using screens before bed can make it hard\
to fall asleep.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What are some good bedtime habits (like reading a book, brushing teeth, lights out)?\
How might staying up too late affect your next day at school?\
What do you think happens in your brain during deep sleep?\
More to Learn:\
Consistency: Go to bed and wake up around the same time every day (even weekends). This\
helps your body\'92s clock.Effects of poor sleep: Without enough sleep, kids may feel tired, have trouble paying attention,\
and be more likely to get sick.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is a dark, quiet bedroom good for sleep?\
How do you think exercise earlier in the day affects sleep quality?\
What time would you set your bedtime to get 10 hours of sleep if you wake up at 7 AM?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 16 | Immune System \'96 The Body\'92s\
Defenses
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about the immune system, the body\'92s defense against germs. We\
explain that the immune system is like an army of cells and barriers (such as skin and white\
blood cells) that protect us from getting sick. We introduce key ideas: some immune cells attack\
invaders directly, others create a memory so the body can respond faster if the same germ\
returns (this is how you get immunity). We also note that immune defenses include things like\
fever and inflammation that help fight infection. Finally, we mention how immune cells can\
recognize when they have fought a germ before, leading to quicker action next time.\
After this lesson, students will understand that the immune system defends against illness. They\
will be able to say that the body has special cells and proteins that identify and fight germs (like\
bacteria and viruses. They will also understand the concept of immune memory or antibodies,\
knowing that after an infection (or vaccination), the immune system remembers the germ.\
Overall, learners will appreciate that keeping a healthy immune system (through nutrition, sleep,\
etc.) helps them avoid infections.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 16 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 16: Immune System \'96 The Body\'92s Defenses\
The immune system is the body\'92s defense against germs and infections. It includes barriers like\
skin, and internal soldiers like white blood cells and antibodies that fight invaders. For example,\
if bacteria or viruses enter the body, immune cells recognize them and destroy them. The\
immune system also \'93remembers\'94 germs: after fighting an infection once, it can respond faster\
the next time. The immune system protects the body from antigens (germs like viruses and\
bacteria) and can react quicker if it has seen the germ before.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one thing your body does to fight off a cold?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you get a fever when you\'92re sick?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think helps your body fight germs (food? medicine?)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Defense cells: White blood cells (like lymphocytes) circulate in blood and tissues to find\
and destroy germs. They also make antibodies that stick to specific germs to help kill\
them.\
Memory: After an illness or vaccine, the immune system remembers the germ so it can\
respond faster next time (this is why you often don\'92t get measles twice). Vaccines work\
by safely teaching the immune system about a germ beforehand.\
Barriers: The skin and mucous membranes (nose, throat lining) are barriers that stop\
many germs from entering. Coughing, sneezing, and fever are body responses that help\
eliminate germs.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do we get swollen glands (lymph nodes) when we have an infection?\
How does washing hands help your immune system? (Hint: less germs entering)\
Can you explain why you might feel tired when fighting an infection?\
More to Learn:\
Lifestyle support: Good nutrition, sleep, and exercise all help your immune system work well.Illness vs. immune reaction: Cold symptoms (runny nose, cough) are mostly caused by immune\
actions against the virus, not the virus itself.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What role do vaccines play in the immune system?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do some people get allergies if the immune system is supposed to fight germs (hint:\
allergies are immune overreactions)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do white blood cells \'93know\'94 what germ to attack (think antibodies/receptors)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 17 | Germs \'96 Bacteria and Viruses
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson is about germs, focusing on the difference between bacteria and viruses. We\
explain that germs are tiny organisms (or particles) that can cause illnesses. Bacteria are\
single-celled living organisms that can reproduce on their own; they can be helpful (like gut\
bacteria) or harmful (like those causing strep throat). Viruses, by contrast, are smaller particles\
(not truly alive) that need to invade living cells to multiply. We use certain comparisons: for\
example, bacteria are living one-celled organisms, and viruses consist of genetic material inside\
a protein shell, becoming active only when they infect a host cell. The lesson covers examples\
of illnesses they cause (bacteria: strep, ear infections; viruses: colds, flu, COVID-19) and\
explains that antibiotics kill bacteria but not viruses. This sets the stage for the next lesson on\
treatments.\
Afterward, learners will be able to distinguish bacteria from viruses. They will recall that bacteria\
are live cells and viruses are genetic particles that hijack cells. They should understand the\
basic idea that most colds and the flu are caused by viruses, while some illnesses like strep\
throat are caused by bacteria. This knowledge helps them see why different germs need\
different treatments.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 17 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 17: Germs \'96 Bacteria and Viruses\
Germs are tiny organisms or particles that can cause sickness. Two major types are bacteria\
and viruses. Bacteria are single-celled living organisms; some are helpful (like gut bacteria) but\
others can cause illnesses (strep throat, ear infections). Viruses are smaller, non-living particles\
consisting of genetic material inside a protein shell. Viruses cannot reproduce by themselves;\
they must invade a living cell and hijack it to make more virus particles. For example, colds and\
flu are caused by viruses; some stomach bugs can be from bacteria. Antibiotics kill bacteria, but\
they do not work on viruses.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name one illness caused by bacteria and one caused by a virus.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why doesn\'92t an antibiotic cure a cold?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Are all bacteria bad for you? Can you think of a helpful one?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Bacteria are living cells; they can multiply on their own. Many bacteria in our gut help\
digest food, but others (like streptococcus) make us sick. They can be killed by\
antibiotics.\
Viruses (like cold, flu, COVID-19) are not fully alive outside cells. They infect cells to\
replicate. Because of this, antibiotics have no effect on viruses.\
Germ-fighting strategies differ: we use vaccines to prevent viral diseases and medicines\
(antibiotics) to treat bacterial infections. Good hygiene helps prevent both (washing\
hands removes both bacteria and viruses).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What does a vaccine do to protect you from germs?\
How do you catch a virus versus a bacteria? Is there a difference?\
What are ways to prevent spreading germs (you already know: e.g. washing hands,\
covering coughs)?More to Learn:\
Superbugs: Overusing antibiotics can lead to bacteria that are resistant (hard to kill). That\'92s why\
doctors prescribe antibiotics only when needed.\
Virus treatments: For viral illnesses, doctors often suggest rest, fluids, and over-the-counter\
meds for symptoms (antivirals are only for some viruses).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do doctors sometimes say \'93it\'92s viral\'94 and recommend just treating symptoms?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can bacteria become good friends with us? (Example: friendly gut bacteria).\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is the immune system\'92s role when a virus infects you?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 18 | Vaccines and Antibiotics
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson explains how we defend against germs using medicine. We cover vaccines and\
antibiotics in age-appropriate terms. First, we describe vaccines: harmless forms (dead or\
weakened) of bacteria or viruses are given to the body so the immune system can learn to fight\
them without getting sick. A vaccine shows the immune system a \'93wanted poster\'94 of the germ.\
Next, we discuss antibiotics: medicines that kill bacteria but do not work on viruses. We stress\
that antibiotics should only be used for bacterial infections, under a doctor\'92s care. The lesson\
clarifies why antibiotics won\'92t cure a cold (a virus) and highlights the importance of vaccination\
for prevention.\
After this lesson, students will know that vaccines help the immune system recognize and fight\
future infections. They will also understand that antibiotics are special medicines for bacterial\
infections only. They should remember examples (flu vaccine, chickenpox vaccine) and the idea\
that vaccines have made many diseases rare. In summary, learners will see vaccines and\
antibiotics as medical tools for protection and treatment of illness.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 18 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 18: Vaccines and Antibiotics\
Vaccines and antibiotics are tools doctors use to fight germs. Vaccines prepare the immune\
system to fight future infections without causing disease. A vaccine contains harmless parts of a\
germ (dead or weakened bacteria/virus). This \'93shows\'94 the immune system a germ\'92s \'93wanted\
poster\'94 so it can make antibodies in advance. If the real germ appears later, the immune system\
attacks it quickly. For example, a flu vaccine helps prevent flu. Antibiotics are medicines that kill\
bacteria or stop their growth. They work only on bacteria, not viruses. That\'92s why antibiotics cure\
infections like strep throat but not the common cold (a virus).\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is the difference between what vaccines do and what antibiotics do?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name a disease we prevent with a vaccine (e.g. measles, polio)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it important to finish all the antibiotics your doctor gives you?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Vaccines: Introduce dead/weakened germs (or parts) to the body so the immune system\
learns to fight them safely. They create immunity (antibodies) without making you sick.\
For instance, the chickenpox or COVID-19 vaccine trains your body to fight those\
viruses.\
Antibiotics: Drugs specifically for bacterial infections. They either kill bacteria or stop\
them multiplying. They do not affect viruses at all. Doctors prescribe antibiotics for things\
like pneumonia or strep throat, not for colds or flu.\
Using antibiotics correctly is important: only take them for bacterial infections and\
complete the course, so all bacteria are killed and resistance is avoided.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why doesn\'92t everyone get antibiotics for a virus like the flu?\
How do vaccines help keep diseases like polio rare?\
What could happen if you stop antibiotics early (before feeling better)?More to Learn:\
Safety: Vaccines are tested to be safe. Side effects are usually minor (like a sore arm or mild\
fever). They are one of the best ways to prevent dangerous diseases.\
Hygiene plus medicine: Even with vaccines and antibiotics, handwashing and clean habits help\
prevent germs in the first place.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name two vaccines a child might get before entering school.\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do antibiotics know which cells to kill (hint: antibiotics target features only bacteria\
have)\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why shouldn\'92t you share someone else\'92s antibiotics?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 19 | Oral Health \'96 Teeth and Hygiene
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson focuses on teeth, gums, and dental health. We teach that teeth are hard structures\
used for biting and chewing food. Kids learn there are different types of teeth (incisors for\
cutting, molars for grinding, etc.) and that humans have two sets in life (baby teeth and\
permanent teeth). We explain how teeth can get cavities: germs in the mouth form plaque that\
can eat away the tooth enamel, causing holes or cavities. The lesson emphasizes preventive\
habits: brushing teeth, flossing, and visiting the dentist regularly to avoid cavities and gum\
problems. We also mention basic hygiene like not eating too much sugary food. Overall, this\
lesson shows that caring for teeth is an important part of overall health.\
After the lesson, learners will understand that healthy teeth help chew food and should be kept\
clean. They will recall that bacteria in the mouth form a sticky film called plaque which can\
cause cavities. They will know that brushing, flossing, and dentist check-ups are ways to\
prevent these problems. Students should be able to explain why eating sweets and skipping\
brushing can lead to a cavity, summarizing that good oral hygiene keeps teeth and gums\
healthy.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 19 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 19: Oral Health \'96 Teeth and Hygiene\
Teeth are hard structures in your mouth used for biting and chewing food. Humans have\
different types of teeth: incisors (front teeth for cutting), canines (sharp teeth for tearing), and\
molars (back teeth for grinding). We first have baby teeth that fall out, then permanent teeth\
come in. In the mouth, bacteria combine with food particles to form a sticky film called plaque.\
The bacteria in plaque produce acids that can eat away tooth enamel, causing cavities (holes).\
Good habits prevent this: brushing teeth twice a day with fluoride toothpaste, flossing, and\
limiting sugary snacks help remove plaque. Dentists also check and clean teeth to catch\
problems early.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What are your baby teeth and why do they fall out?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why should you brush your teeth every day?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name a tooth type and what it does (like molars grind food)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Teeth let us chew food into smaller pieces. Strong enamel (outer coating) protects teeth,\
but it can be damaged by plaque acids. Cavities happen when enamel breaks down.\
Cavities (tooth decay): Bacteria + sugary food form plaque; acids from plaque dissolve\
enamel, forming holes. If untreated, cavities can hurt and lead to infections. Brushing\
and flossing remove plaque before it causes decay.\
Healthy gums and teeth: also floss regularly to clean between teeth, and visit the dentist\
for check-ups and cleanings. Fluoride in toothpaste and water helps strengthen enamel.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What causes a tooth to have a hole (cavity)?\
How does sugar in drinks affect your teeth?\
Why is fluoride (in toothpaste) good for teeth?\
More to Learn:\
Milk and calcium: Teeth (and bones) need calcium to stay strong. Dairy or fortified alternatives\
supply calcium and vitamin D.Baby teeth are important: they help children chew and talk, and they hold space for adult teeth.\
Protect them too (no sharing utensils with baby teeth).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why should you not eat candy right before bed?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does saliva (spit) help protect your teeth?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do dentists do if a tooth has a big cavity?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 20 | Puberty and Reproductive System
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students explore human reproduction and puberty (with appropriate sensitivity for\
older children). We explain that creating a baby involves a sperm (from a male) and an egg\
(from a female) joining together. Basic anatomy is covered: boys have testes that make sperm;\
girls have ovaries that release eggs. We teach that starting around 10\'9612 years old, bodies go\
through changes called puberty. For girls, this includes one ovary releasing an egg each month\
and menstruation (a monthly cycle). For boys, puberty means their testes start making large\
numbers of sperm daily. The main idea is that boys and girls develop new functions to prepare\
for making babies later.\
After this lesson, learners will know the basic functions of male and female reproductive organs:\
that testes produce sperm and ovaries produce eggs. They will understand that puberty is when\
these systems become active (e.g. girls begin monthly cycles). They should be able to use\
correct terms (sperm, egg, menstruation) and know that fertilization of an egg by a sperm is how\
a pregnancy begins. Overall, students will understand the role of puberty in growth and human\
reproduction.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 20 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 20: Puberty and Reproductive System\
Puberty is the time when the body becomes capable of reproduction. During puberty (around\
ages 10\'9614), many changes happen under the skin. Boys and girls develop sex organs: males\
have testes (in the scrotum) that begin making sperm; females have ovaries (inside the body)\
that release an egg each month. Hormones like estrogen and testosterone cause visible\
changes: voice deepens in boys, facial hair grows, and testes produce sperm daily; girls\
develop breasts, start menstrual periods as an egg is released monthly (menstruation). These\
changes prepare the body for making babies later. It\'92s important to understand these changes\
and stay clean (like taking showers and wearing clean clothes) as the body becomes more\
sensitive.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Who in your family had body changes when they were around 11\'9613 years old?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you name two changes that happen to boys and two changes for girls in puberty?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it good to bathe more often during puberty?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Reproductive organs: Males have testes (in scrotum) that produce sperm and hormones;\
females have ovaries that produce eggs. These organs also produce sex hormones\
(testosterone in boys, estrogen in girls).\
Puberty changes: Boys grow facial/body hair, their penis/testes grow, and voice\
deepens. Girls develop breasts, wider hips, and start periods (monthly shedding of the\
uterine lining if no pregnancy). These are normal and natural.\
Reproduction basics: An egg and sperm can join (fertilize) to start a baby\'92s development.\
The fertilized egg implants in the uterus and grows into a baby over nine months.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What is menstruation and why does it happen in females?\
How often do men\'92s bodies produce sperm (hint: every day after puberty)?\
Why do boys and girls need sex education (to understand these changes and how to\
stay healthy)?More to Learn:\
Privacy and care: During puberty, people often need more privacy and should practice good\
hygiene (daily bathing, deodorant for body odor, menstrual supplies for girls).\
Emotional changes: Puberty also affects emotions and thinking (due to hormones). It\'92s normal to\
feel mood swings or new feelings.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does understanding puberty help teenagers?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is respect and privacy important when discussing these topics?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one way to manage mood changes during puberty (e.g., talking to friends,\
exercising)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 21 | DNA and Heredity
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson introduces DNA, genes, and heredity. We explain that every person\'92s body has a\
set of instructions called DNA, which is packed into chromosomes inside nearly every cell. A\
gene is a section of DNA that carries information for a specific trait. Britannica explains that\
genes are the basic units of heredity and they exist on chromosomes made of DNA. We use\
simple examples: eye color and hair color come from genes. We emphasize that children get\
half of their genes from each parent, which is why they may look like mom or dad. The lesson\
clarifies that not all traits are the same (you might have dad\'92s eyes but mom\'92s hair), because\
each trait is determined by specific genes. We do not go deep into dominant/recessive, but\
highlight that heredity is how characteristics pass down.\
By the end, students will know that genes (made of DNA) carry inherited information. They will\
be able to say that each cell has chromosomes containing genes, and these determine traits\
from parents. They will understand in a broad sense how children resemble their parents\
(sharing gene instructions) but are also unique. This lesson lays the foundation for\
understanding genetics and why families share certain characteristics.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 21 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 21: DNA and Heredity\
DNA is the instruction manual inside cells that carries hereditary information. It is packed into\
chromosomes (thread-like structures) in nearly every cell. Genes are segments of DNA that\
carry information for specific traits (like eye color or hair color). Genes are the basic units of\
heredity that control how we grow and what we look like. We inherit our genes from our parents\
(half from each). That\'92s why children often look like mom or dad. Not all traits are the same: you\
might have your mother\'92s eye color and your father\'92s height. This is because different genes\
control different traits.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you have your parents\'92 eye color or hair?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you think of a trait that siblings might share with each other (hair color, dimples)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one physical trait you have that you think came from your family?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Every person\'92s DNA is unique, but half of it comes from the mother\'92s egg and half from\
the father\'92s sperm. This mixing of genes makes you related but also unique.\
Genes provide the \'93plan\'94 for all body parts. For example, genes determine whether you\
have brown or blue eyes. They also influence height, blood type, and even some health\
risks.\
Heredity means inherited traits: hair type, eye color, and even things like earlobe shape\
are passed down by genes. Environment and lifestyle also play a role, so you might not\
look exactly like anyone, but genetics set the blueprint.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What are chromosomes, and where are they found in the cell? (Answer: In the nucleus,\
containing DNA)\
How could two tall parents have a shorter child? (Think about dominant/recessive\
genes)\
Is it possible for siblings to look very different? Why or why not?More to Learn:\
Genetic variation: Everyone\'92s genes are mixed in unique ways, so each person is different.\
Even identical twins have almost the same genes, which is why they look very alike.\
Genetics and health: Some conditions (like some types of diabetes or color blindness) are\
inherited. Knowing family medical history can be important.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
How might genes influence things other than appearance (e.g., how your body works)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do family members sometimes share diseases or allergies?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What can someone do if a genetic risk is found in the family (hint: healthy lifestyle,\
check-ups)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 22 | Hormones and the Endocrine\
System
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson is about hormones, the body\'92s chemical messengers. We explain that hormones are\
chemicals released by glands (like the pituitary, thyroid, pancreas, etc.) and travel through the\
blood to tell cells what to do. Britannica Kids says, Hormones are chemicals that tell cells and\
body parts to do certain things. For example, hormones tell the body when to grow and when to\
stop growing. We introduce examples of hormones: growth hormone (helps children grow),\
insulin (controls blood sugar), arenaline (speeds up heart rate in an emergency), and sex\
hormones (estrogen and testosterone trigger puberty changes). The lesson describes the\
endocrine glands simply and says that hormones help regulate growth, energy use, and other\
processes.\
After this lesson, learners will know that the endocrine system uses hormones to coordinate\
body functions. They will recall that hormones come from glands and that each hormone has\
specific targets (for example, insulin regulates sugar; growth hormone helps muscles grow.\
They will understand that even though hormones work slowly through the blood, they have\
powerful effects on growth and development. In summary, students will see hormones as an\
important part of why the body changes over time (like during puberty) and how it stays in\
balance.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 22 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 22: Hormones and the Endocrine System\
Hormones are chemical messengers in the body. They are produced by glands (called the\
endocrine system) and travel through the blood to organs and cells, telling them what to do.\
Hormones tell cells and body parts to do certain things. For example, insulin (from the\
pancreas) tells body cells to take in sugar; growth hormone (from the pituitary gland) tells the\
body to grow; adrenaline (from adrenal glands) triggers the \'93fight or flight\'94 response (increases\
heart rate). During puberty, sex hormones (estrogen, testosterone) cause the body changes we\
discussed earlier.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think happens if your body has too much sugar and not enough insulin?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Name a hormone you\'92ve heard of (like insulin) and what it does.\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is the endocrine system important for growth?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Glands (pituitary, thyroid, pancreas, adrenal, etc.) release hormones into the\
bloodstream. Each hormone has target cells. For example, insulin (pancreas) regulates\
blood sugar. Growth hormone (pituitary) stimulates growth of bones and muscles.\
Thyroid hormones control metabolism (how quickly we use energy).\
Hormones act slower than nerves (circulating in blood), but they have long-lasting\
effects. They regulate growth, metabolism, water balance, and more.\
The endocrine system keeps the body in balance. For instance, after eating, insulin\
lowers blood glucose; if blood sugar drops, another hormone (glucagon) raises it.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Which organ makes insulin? What happens if it doesn\'92t make enough? (Answer:\
pancreas; leads to diabetes)\
How do adrenaline and insulin work differently? (Adrenaline reacts quickly to stress;\
insulin regulates energy use)\
What symptoms might you see if your thyroid gland released too little hormone (hint:\
metabolism slows)?More to Learn:\
Balance: Hormone levels are very carefully controlled by feedback loops. For example, when\
blood sugar rises, insulin is released; when sugar falls, insulin stops.\
Health tip: Problems in hormones can cause conditions (e.g., diabetes from insulin issues,\
hyperthyroidism from too much thyroid hormone). Eating well and seeing doctors helps manage\
them.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do people with diabetes need insulin injections?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How might someone\'92s energy level be affected if they have too little thyroid hormone?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What effects do sex hormones have on emotions (hint: sometimes mood swings during\
puberty)?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 23 | Hygiene \'96 Keeping Germs Away
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn basic hygiene habits that help keep them healthy. We focus on\
simple practices like washing hands with soap and water, covering coughs and sneezes, and\
bathing regularly. We stress that these habits remove or block germs. We explain important\
moments to wash hands: after using the bathroom, before eating, after playing outside or\
petting animals, etc. The lesson also mentions dental care (brushing teeth) and nail/trimming\
hair for cleanliness. We encourage students to make handwashing a habit (adding soap,\
scrubbing thoroughly). This lesson ties in with earlier ones: keeping hands clean helps the\
immune system by not introducing germs into the body.\
Afterward, learners will understand that hygiene is key to preventing illness. They will remember\
that simple actions (washing hands, bathing) remove germs and protect themselves and others.\
They will know when to wash hands and why (to stop colds, flu, stomach bugs). In short,\
students will see good hygiene as an important daily routine that keeps their body\'92s defenses\
strong.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 23 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 23: Hygiene \'96 Keeping Germs Away\
Hygiene means keeping clean to stay healthy. Simple habits like washing hands with soap and\
water are among the best ways to prevent illness. We should wash hands before eating, after\
using the bathroom, and after playing outside or sneezing. Other hygiene practices: bathe or\
shower regularly, brush teeth daily (oral hygiene), and keep nails and clothes clean. Cover\
coughs and sneezes with your elbow or a tissue (to stop spreading germs). Good hygiene\
complements the immune system by reducing the germs that enter the body.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
When is one of the most important times to wash your hands?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do you cover your mouth or nose when you cough or sneeze?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why should you trim your fingernails or not bite them?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Washing hands removes germs you might have picked up from surfaces or other people.\
Soap, water, and scrubbing (20 seconds) physically wash away viruses and bacteria.\
Good personal hygiene: regular bathing keeps skin and hair clean; wearing clean\
clothes; brushing teeth and flossing remove germs from your mouth (which can cause\
illness or cavities).\
Keeping your environment clean helps too: cover your nose/mouth when coughing or\
sneezing, throw tissues away, and clean toys or phones regularly.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Why is it important to wash your hands after using the bathroom?\
How does cleaning a cut (with soap and water) help prevent infection?\
What germs are you avoiding by washing your hands befoe eating?\
More to Learn:\
Community hygiene: Stay home and rest if you\'92re very sick to avoid passing germs to others\
(especially important with contagious diseases).Hygiene myth: Bathing too often can dry out skin. Typically, a daily shower or bath and daily\
handwashing are ideal.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What happens if you touch your eyes or mouth with dirty hands?\
How does hygiene relate to the immune system?\
Why do you think soap is better than just water for handwashing?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 24 | Allergies \'96 When the Body\
Overreacts
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson explains allergies, which are special immune reactions. We describe allergies as\
cases when the immune system mistakenly sees something harmless (like pollen, pet dander,\
or certain foods) as a threat. We give examples of common allergies: sneezing at pollen (hay\
fever), itchy eyes from dust mites, or hives from peanut exposure. The lesson explains why\
symptoms happen: the body releases chemicals (like histamine) that cause sneezing, itching, or\
watery eyes. We stress that allergies are not contagious. Children learn that treatments (like\
antihistamine medicine or avoiding triggers) can help manage allergies.\
By the end, students will understand that allergies are caused by the immune system being too\
sensitive. They will recall that in an allergy the immune system reacts to certain substances\
(substances called allergens). They will know some allergy symptoms (sneezing, itching) and\
simple management (cleaning allergen from room, medicine). This lesson helps them\
differentiate colds (viral) from allergies (immune reaction).
\fs51\fsmilli25995 24 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 24: Allergies \'96 When the Body Overreacts\
Allergies happen when the immune system overreacts to a harmless substance (allergen) like\
pollen, pet dander, or certain foods. Normally, these things don\'92t hurt us, but in allergies our\
body treats them like dangerous invaders. The immune system creates special antibodies to\
fight the allergen. When exposed again, these antibodies cause symptoms. For example, if\
you\'92re allergic to pollen, breathing it in makes your immune system release histamine, causing\
sneezing and itchy eyes. Common allergens include dust mites, pollen, animal fur, or foods like\
peanuts. Allergies can make you sneeze, itch, or get a rash, but they are not contagious.\
They\'92re managed by avoiding the trigger or using medicine (like antihistamines) to block the\
reaction.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What happens if someone allergic to peanut eats a peanut?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you have a cold? Or is it an allergy? What\'92s the difference?\
\uc0\u9679 \
If petting a cat makes your eyes itchy, what does that suggest?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
When the immune system misidentifies a harmless substance as a threat, it produces\
antibodies to fight it. This causes allergy symptoms (sneezing, runny nose, hives, etc.).\
Histamine is a chemical released during an allergic reaction. It makes blood vessels\
swell, mucus form, and causes itching or swelling (e.g. watery eyes with pollen allergy).\
Allergic reactions range from mild (sneezing) to severe (anaphylaxis, which is\
life-threatening swelling, for example from a peanut allergy). Anaphylaxis requires\
immediate medical care (EpiPen, etc.).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How are allergies different from catching a cold? (Hint: allergies don\'92t spread\
person-to-person, and have triggers like pollen)\
Why do antihistamine medicines help with allergy symptoms?\
How can people find out what they are allergic to?More to Learn:\
Allergy management: Keep windows closed when pollen is high, clean your room to reduce\
dust, and read labels to avoid food allergens.\
Immune system note: Allergies mean the immune system is working (perhaps too well!),\
showing how it can sometimes make mistakes.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why might someone outgrow an allergy or develop new ones?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can an allergy go away on its own?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What precautions should a child with a severe allergy always take?
\fs51\fsmilli25995 25 | Asthma \'96 Breathing Difficulties
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson is about asthma, a common lung condition. We explain that asthma makes it\
sometimes hard to breathe because the airways narrow. Britannica describes that during an\
asthma attack, the small tubes in the lungs tighten and swell, and fill with mucus, making\
breathing difficult. The lesson outlines typical symptoms: coughing, wheezing (a whistling\
sound), and feeling out of breath. We also talk about triggers: things that can bring on an attack,\
such as exercise, dust, pollen, or a cold. The lesson reassures that asthma can be managed\
with medicine (inhalers) and by avoiding triggers. The goal is to help students recognize asthma\
as a health issue that can be controlled with care.\
After this lesson, learners will know that asthma is not a cold but a reaction in the lungs. They\
will recall that in an asthma attack, the muscles around the airways tighten and the airways\
swell. They will recognize symptoms of an attack and know that doctors can give inhalers to\
help open the airways. Overall, students will understand that asthma is a long-term condition\
affecting breathing and that it is treatable.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 25 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 25: Asthma \'96 Breathing Difficulties\
Asthma is a condition that affects the lungs and breathing. During an asthma attack, the airways\
(small tubes in the lungs) narrow and fill with mucus, making it hard to breathe. Muscles around\
the airways tighten (called bronchoconstriction), the lining of the airways swells, and more\
mucus is produced. This leads to symptoms like coughing, wheezing (a whistling sound when\
breathing), and feeling out of breath. Asthma attacks can be triggered by exercise, cold air,\
allergens (like pollen or dust), or illness. People with asthma use inhalers: one type\
(bronchodilator) quickly opens airways during an attack, another type (steroid) prevents\
inflammation. With proper care and avoiding triggers, most people with asthma can control their\
symptoms.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What does it feel like to try to breathe through a straw?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you list things that might make it hard for someone with asthma to breathe?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Do you know anyone (or have you heard of someone) who uses an inhaler?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Asthma attacks happen because the small tubes in the lungs become too narrow.\
Muscle spasms and swelling plus mucus block airflow.\
Symptoms: coughing (often at night), wheezing (whistling breath sound), chest tightness,\
and trouble taking full breaths.\
Triggers: exercise (exercise-induced asthma), cold air, allergens (dust mites, pet dander,\
mold), smoke, or respiratory infections can trigger an attack. Sometimes stress or strong\
emotions can too.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
How is asthma different from a regular cold or cough?\
What should someone with an asthma attack do first (hint: use their \'93rescue\'94 inhaler)?\
Why is it important to know your asthma triggers?More to Learn:\
Medication: Rescue inhalers (like albuterol) act fast to open airways. Controllers (like inhaled\
steroids) reduce long-term inflammation but are taken daily.\
Lifestyle: Not smoking and avoiding secondhand smoke is critical, as smoke is a strong trigger.\
Staying active and healthy helps (with doctor\'92s guidance).\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why might a doctor do a lung function test for someone with asthma?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What should classmates do if someone has an asthma attack at school?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does obesity or poor fitness influence asthma? (Hint: working lungs harder)
\fs51\fsmilli25995 26 | Cancer \'96 Cells Out of Control
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this more advanced lesson, we explain cancer in basic terms. Students learn that cancer\
happens when some body cells grow and divide in an uncontrolled way. We emphasize that\
normally, cells grow in a regulated way, but cancer starts when something goes wrong in the\
cell\'92s instructions (genes). This causes the cell to multiply too much, forming a mass called a\
tumor. We clarify that cancer cells can invade nearby tissues. Importantly, we stress that cancer\
is not contagious (you cannot \'93catch\'94 cancer from another person). We mention that cancer can\
affect people of all ages (though more common in adults) and that scientists are working on\
treatments. The lesson uses gentle language: cancer is a term for many diseases where cells\
misbehave by multiplying uncontrollably.\
After this lesson, learners will know that cancer involves abnormal cell growth. They will\
remember that cancer occurs when a cell\'92s normal controls fail and it starts dividing on its own.\
They will also understand that cancer cannot spread from person to person like a cold, since it\
comes from changes inside one\'92s own cells. Students will see cancer as a serious but medical\
problem that doctors work hard to treat, tying back to the idea that healthy cells have regulated\
growth.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 26 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 26: Cancer \'96 Cells Out of Control\
Cancer is a disease where some of the body\'92s cells begin to grow and divide uncontrollably.\
Normally, cells grow in a controlled way, but cancer happens when a cell\'92s DNA is damaged and\
it ignores the rules. That cell keeps multiplying and can form a mass called a tumor. Cancer\
cells can invade nearby tissues and sometimes spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.\
Importantly, cancer is not contagious \'96 you cannot catch cancer from someone else. Cancer\
can affect people of any age (children and adults) and many types exist (for example, leukemia\
is cancer of blood cells, sarcoma affects bone or muscle). Treatment may include surgery\
(removing tumors), chemotherapy (drugs that kill fast-growing cells), radiation therapy, or other\
approaches. Early detection and treatment increase chances of cure.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is a tumor? How is it different from a normal lump?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can you list one type of cancer (like skin cancer or leukemia)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do you think doctors say cancer is a disease of your own cells?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Cancer starts from changes (mutations) in a cell\'92s genes that control growth. This\
abnormal cell divides too fast and doesn\'92t die when it should.\
Tumors can be benign (non-cancerous) or malignant (cancerous). Malignant tumors\
invade nearby tissue. Cancer cells can travel through blood or lymph and form new\
tumors elsewhere (metastasis).\
Treatments: Surgery can remove localized tumors; chemotherapy drugs target rapidly\
dividing cells; radiation targets tumors with high-energy beams. Modern medicine is\
constantly improving treatments.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
If cancer cells are your own cells, why do doctors treat them as if they are enemies?\
Why is early detection (like checking for unusual lumps or doctor check-ups) important?\
How do healthy cells differ from cancer cells in terms of growth and behavior?More to Learn:\
Prevention: Some cancers can be prevented (avoid smoking, sun protection, vaccines for\
viruses like HPV). Healthy habits (diet, exercise) may lower some risks.\
Survival: Not all tumors are deadly. Many people survive cancer, especially when found early.\
Support from doctors, family, and healthy choices help.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why do cancer treatments often cause side effects like hair loss or nausea?\
\uc0\u9679 \
What is one way our body tries to fight cancer on its own (hint: immune cells can attack\
cancer cells, and research into immunotherapy)?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How might regular medcal screenings (like mammograms, colonoscopies) help with\
cancer?\
\uc0\u9679 
\fs51\fsmilli25995 27 | Organ Transplants and Donation
\fs21\fsmilli10995 This lesson introduces the concept of organ transplant. We explain that if an organ (like a kidney\
or liver) fails, doctors can sometimes replace it. A transplant (or graft) means taking a healthy\
organ from one person (the donor) and putting it into someone else (the recipient). We describe\
that donors can be living (donating one of two kidneys or part of a liver) or deceased (donating\
organs like heart, lungs, corneas). The lesson highlights that transplants can save lives, but the\
body may reject a foreign organ. To prevent rejection, patients take medicines that quiet the\
immune system. Transplants are another form of medical treatment for sick organs.\
After the lesson, students will understand the basic idea of organ transplantation. They will\
recall that a transplant replaces a damaged part with a healthy one from a donor. They will learn\
the terms 
\f1\i donor 
\f0\i0 and 
\f1\i recipient 
\f0\i0 and know that medications are needed to prevent rejection. In\
essence, learners will know that organ donation and transplant are important medical\
procedures that help patients when organs fail, and that medicine helps the body accept the\
new organ.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 27 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 27: Organ Transplants and Donation\
Sometimes an organ (like a kidney or heart) fails and cannot heal on its own. Doctors can save\
lives by transplanting a healthy organ from a donor. A donor can be living or deceased. For\
example, people can donate one kidney (we have two) or part of their liver and still live normally.\
Organs like heart, lungs, or corneas usually come from deceased donors (who have agreed or\
whose families agreed to donate). The transplanted organ goes into the patient (recipient). After\
transplant, the body might see the new organ as \'93foreign,\
\'94 so the patient takes special\
medicines (immunosuppressants) to prevent rejection. These medicines reduce the immune\
response so the organ can work. Organ transplant is a complex but life-saving procedure.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Which organ might someone donate to save a friend\'92s life?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Do you know anyone who is on an organ transplant list or has had a transplant?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why does someone need to take medicine after getting an organ transplant?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Donors: A living person can donate some organs (kidney, part of liver) if it\'92s safe for\
them. Organs from deceased donors (cadavers) include heart, lungs, liver, kidneys,\
pancreas. Organs must be matched (blood type, tissue type) to reduce rejection.\
Transplant surgery: The new organ replaces the failing one. For example, a patient\
without working kidneys can receive a healthy kidney and then produce urine again.\
Rejection and meds: The immune system usually fights off foreign tissues. To stop it,\
transplant patients take immunosuppressant drugs so the body accepts the organ.\
These must be taken carefully for life.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
What is the difference between a live donor and a cadaver donor?\
Why do patients who get a new organ need to be careful about infections? (Because\
their immune system is weaker from the medications.)\
How long can a donated organ last in a patient? (Answer: it varies; for example, a kidney\
transplant can last many years, but not forever.)More to Learn:\
Tissue donation: Besides organs, tissues like corneas (for vision), skin (for burns), and bone\
marrow (for blood diseases) can also be donated.\
Gift of life: Organ donation saves lives. Discussing donation wishes with family and registering\
as a donor can help others.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can one person donate organs to more than one person? (Yes: kidneys to two people,\
or lungs to multiple, etc.)\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why must organs from deceased donors be transplanted quickly? (Because they only\
survive a limited time outside the body.)\
\uc0\u9679 \
What does \'93live on dialysis\'94 mean (for kidney failure)? How does that relate to\
transplant?\
\uc0\u9679 
\fs51\fsmilli25995 28 | Medical Imaging \'96 Seeing Inside\
the Body
\fs21\fsmilli10995 In this lesson, students learn about ways doctors look inside the body without surgery. We\
introduce imaging tools like X-rays and MRI as examples. We explain that X-ray uses a form of\
energy (radiation) to take a picture of the inside of the body. For example, an X-ray can show\
the bones inside a part of the body. We also mention (without heavy detail) that MRI uses\
magnets, and ultrasound uses sound waves, to create images of organs and tissues. The\
lesson emphasizes that these tools are safe and help doctors diagnose broken bones or\
illnesses. Students see that imaging is part of medical technology that doctors use to\
understand what\'92s happening inside our bodies without having to open them up.\
Afterward, learners will know that imaging is like taking a special \'93photo\'94 of the insides. They will\
remember that X-rays reveal bones. They will understand that imaging helps doctors see things\
like fractures, swallowed objects, or even babies before they are born. This lesson gives them a\
basic idea of modern medical tools that help doctors.
\fs51\fsmilli25995 28 | Content
\fs21\fsmilli10995 Lesson 28: Medical Imaging \'96 Seeing Inside the Body\
Doctors have tools to see inside the body without surgery. X-rays are one common tool: they are\
powerful rays that pass through soft tissues but are blocked by dense bones. On an X-ray\
image, bones appear white and soft tissues dark. For example, an X-ray can show if a bone is\
broken or if a swallowed object is in the chest. Other imaging methods: MRI (magnetic\
resonance imaging) uses magnetic fields and radio waves to image organs (no radiation);\
ultrasound uses sound waves (like in pregnancy to see a baby). These images help diagnose\
injuries or illnesses (fractures, lung infections, blockages, even seeing babies before birth)\
without cutting the body open.\
Starter Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Who might need an X-ray? (e.g., after a fall or when swallowed something)\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why would a doctor use an ultrasound on a pregnant woman?\
\uc0\u9679 \
How does an X-ray picture look (light vs dark areas)?\
Key Points:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
X-ray: A quick imaging method for bones and some chest exams. It uses a small dose of\
radiation to create an image. Bones show up clearly.\
MRI: Uses magnets; great for soft tissues (brain, spinal cord, joints) to see details. No\
radiation is used, but it takes longer.\
Ultrasound: Safe (sound waves) and real-time; shows images of internal organs\
(kidneys, liver) and baby in uterus. It\'92s often used for prenatal care.\
Imaging is crucial: it helps doctors know if a bone is broken, if pneumonia is in lungs, or\
how big an organ is. It guides treatment without invasive surgery.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
\uc0\u9679 \
Which test would a dentist use to look for cavities or check roots? (Answer: dental X-ray)\
How is imaging helpful in finding out if someone has swallowed something they shouldn\'92t\
have?\
\uc0\u9679 \
Why might an MRI be used for a knee injury instead of an X-ray?More to Learn:\
Safety: Doctors use the lowest radiation dose possible for X-rays. Protective shields (like\
aprons) protect other parts.\
Interpretation: A trained radiologist or doctor must read the images. You should always let\
doctors know if you might be pregnant before X-rays or CT scans.\
Questions:\
\uc0\u9679 \
Can X-rays detect cancer? (They can show tumors if big; otherwise CT/MRI are better)\
\uc0\u9679 \
What do you think the bright and dark areas represent on an X-ray film? (Bright=bone,\
dark=air/soft tissue)\
\uc0\u9679 \
How do image findings change treatment? (Example: seeing a broken bone means\
setting the bone or surgery)}